<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 39</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-39" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Always apart⁠—A bequest of the unknown’s⁠—The farm established at the corral⁠—Twelve years⁠—The boatswain’s mate of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>⁠—Left on tabor island⁠—The hand of Smith⁠—The mysterious paper</p>
			</header>
			<p>These last events justified the presentiments of the colonists. There was some terrible past in the life of this man, expiated, perhaps, in the eyes of men, but which his conscience still held unabsolved. At any rate, he felt remorse; he had repented, and his new friends would have cordially grasped that hand, but he did not feel himself worthy to offer it to honest men. Nevertheless, after the struggle with the jaguar, he did not go back to the forest, but remained within the bounds of Granite House.</p>
			<p>What was the mystery of this life? Would he speak of it some day? The colonists thought so, but they agreed that, under no circumstances, would they ask him for his secret; and, in the meantime, to associate with him as if they suspected nothing.</p>
			<p>For some days everything went on as usual. Smith and Spilett worked together, sometimes as chemists, sometimes as physicists, the reporter never leaving the engineer, except to hunt with Herbert, as it was not prudent to allow the young lad to traverse the forest alone. As to Neb and Pencroff, the work in the stables and poultry-yard, or at the corral, besides the chores about Granite House, kept them busy.</p>
			<p>The Unknown worked apart from the others. He had gone back to his former habit of taking no share in the meals, of sleeping under the trees, of having nothing to do with his companions. It seemed, indeed, as if the society of those who had saved him was intolerable.</p>
			<p>“But why, then,” asked Pencroff, “did he seek succor from his fellow-creatures; why did he throw this paper in the sea?”</p>
			<p>“He will tell us everything,” was Smith’s invariable answer.</p>
			<p>“But when?”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps sooner than you think, Pencroff.”</p>
			<p>And, indeed, on the 10th of December, a week after his return to Granite House, the Unknown accosted the engineer and in a quiet humble voice said:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Sir, I have a request to make.”</p>
			<p>“Speak,” replied the engineer, “but, first, let me ask you a question?”</p>
			<p>At these words the Unknown colored and drew back. Smith saw what was passing in the mind of the culprit, who feared, doubtless, that the engineer would question him upon his past.</p>
			<p>Smith took him by the hand.</p>
			<p>“Comrade,” said he, “we are not only companions, we are friends. I wanted to say this to you first, now I will listen.”</p>
			<p>The Unknown covered his eyes with his hand; a sort of tremor seized him, and for some moments he was unable to articulate a word.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said he, at length, “I came to implore a favor from you.”</p>
			<p>“What is it?”</p>
			<p>“You have, four or five miles from here, at the foot of the mountain, a corral for your animals. These require looking after. Will you permit me to live over there with them?”</p>
			<p>Smith regarded the unhappy man for some time, with deep commiseration. Then:⁠—</p>
			<p>“My friend,” said he, “the corral has nothing but sheds, only fit for the animals⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It will be good enough, for me, sir.”</p>
			<p>“My friend,” replied Smith, “we will never thwart you in anything. If you wish to live in the corral, you may; nevertheless, you will always be welcome at Granite House. But since you desire to stay at the corral, we will do what is necessary to make you comfortable.”</p>
			<p>“Never mind about that, I will get along well enough.”</p>
			<p>“My friend,” responded Smith, who persisted in the use of this cordial title, “you must let us be the judges in that matter.”</p>
			<p>The Unknown thanked the engineer and went away. And Smith, having told his companions of the proposition that had been made, they decided to build a log house at the corral, and to make it as comfortable as possible.</p>
			<p>The same day the colonists went, with the necessary tools, to the place, and before the week was out the house was ready for its guest. It was built twenty feet from the sheds, at a place where the herd of moufflons, now numbering twenty-four animals, could be easily overlooked. Some furniture, including a bed, table, bench, clothespress, and chest was made, and some arms, ammunition, and tools, were carried there.</p>
			<p>The Unknown, meanwhile, had not seen his new home, letting the colonists work without him, while he remained at the plateau, wishing, doubtless, to finish up his work there. And, indeed, by his exertion the ground was completely tilled, and ready for the sowing when the time should arrive.</p>
			<p>On the 20th everything was prepared at the corral, aid the engineer told the Unknown that his house was ready for him, to which the other replied that he would sleep there that night.</p>
			<p>The same evening, the colonists were all together in the great hall of Granite House. It was eight o’clock, the time of their companion’s departure; and not wishing by their presence to impose on him the leave-taking, which would, perhaps, have cost him an effort, they had left him alone and gone up into Granite House.</p>
			<p>They had been conversing together in the hall for some minutes, when there was a light knock on the door, the Unknown entered, and without further introduction:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Before I leave you, sirs,” said he, “it is well that you should know my history. This is it.”</p>
			<p>These simple words greatly affected Smith and companions. The engineer started up.</p>
			<p>“We ask to hear nothing, my friend,” he said. “It is your right to be silent⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is my duty to speak.”</p>
			<p>“Then sit down.”</p>
			<p>“I will stand where I am.”</p>
			<p>“We are ready to hear what you have to say,” said Smith.</p>
			<p>The Unknown stood in a shadowed corner of the hall, bareheaded, his arms crossed on his breast. In this position, in a hoarse voice, speaking as one who forces himself to speak, he made the following recital, uninterrupted by any word from his auditors:⁠—</p>
			<p>“On the 20th of December, 1854, a steam pleasure-yacht, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, belonging to a Scotch nobleman, Lord Glenarvan, cast anchor at Cape Bernoulli, on the western coast of Australia, near the thirty-seventh parallel. On board the yacht were Lord Glenarvan, his wife, a major in the English army, a French geographer, a little boy, and a little girl. These two last were the children of Captain Grant, of the ship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>, which, with its cargo, had been lost the year before. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> was commanded by Captain John Mangles, and was manned by a crew of fifteen men.</p>
			<p>“This is the reason why the yacht was on the Australian coast at that season:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Six months before, a bottle containing a paper written in English, German, and French, had been picked up by the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> in the Irish Sea. This paper said, in substance, that three persons still survived from the wreck of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>; that they were the captain and two of the men; that they had found refuge on a land of which the latitude and longitude was given, but the longitude, blotted by the sea water, was no longer legible.</p>
			<p>“The latitude was 37° 11′ south. Now, as the longitude was unknown, if they followed the latitude across continents and seas, they were certain to arrive at the land inhabited by Captain Grant and his companions.</p>
			<p>“The English Admiralty, having hesitated to undertake the search, Lord Glenarvan had resolved to do everything in his power to recover the captain. Mary and Robert Grant had been in correspondence with him, and the yacht <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> was made ready for a long voyage, in which the family of Lord Glenarvan and the children of the captain intended to participate. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, leaving Glasgow, crossed the Atlantic, passed the Straits of Magellan, and proceeded up the Pacific to Patagonia, where, according to the first theory suggested by the paper, they might believe that Captain Grant was a prisoner to the natives.</p>
			<p>“The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> left its passengers on the western coast of Patagonia, and sailed for Cape Corrientes on the eastern coast, there to wait for them.</p>
			<p>“Lord Glenarvan crossed Patagonia, following the 37th parallel, and, not having found any trace of the captain, he reembarked on the 13th of November, in order to continue his search across the ocean.</p>
			<p>“After having visited without success the islands of Tristan d’Acunha and of Amsterdam, lying in the course, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, as I have stated, arrived at Cape Bernouilli on the 20th of December, 1854.</p>
			<p>“It was Lord Glenarvan’s intention to cross Australia, as he had crossed Patagonia, and he disembarked. Some miles from the coast was a farm belonging to an Irishman, who offered hospitality to the travellers. Lord Glenarvan told the Irishman the object which had brought him to that region, and asked if he had heard of an English three-master, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>, having been lost, within two years, on the west coast of Australia.</p>
			<p>“The Irishman had never heard of this disaster, but, to the great surprise of everybody, one of his servants, intervening, said:⁠—</p>
			<p>“ ‘Heaven be praised, my lord. If Captain Grant is still alive he is in Australia.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Who are you?’ demanded Lord Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“ ‘A Scotchman, like yourself, my lord,’ answered this man, ‘and one of the companions of Captain Grant, one of the survivors of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>.’</p>
			<p>“This man called himself Ayrton. He had been, in short, boatswain’s mate of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>, as his papers proved. But, separated from Captain Grant at the moment when the ship went to pieces on the rocks, he had believed until this moment that everyone had perished but himself.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Only,’ he added, ‘it was not on the western but on the eastern coast of Australia that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i> was lost; and if the Captain is still living he is a prisoner to the natives, and he must be searched for there.’</p>
			<p>“This man said these things frankly and with a confident expression. No one would have doubted what he said. The Irishman, in whose service he had been for more than a year, spoke in his favor. Lord Glenarvan believed in his loyalty, and, following his advice, he resolved to cross Australia, following the 37th parallel. Lord Glenarvan, his wife, the children, the major, the Frenchman, Captain Mangles and some sailors formed the little party under the guidance of Ayrton, while the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, under the command of the mate, Tom Austin, went to Melbourne, to await further instructions.</p>
			<p>“They left on the 23nd of December, 1861.</p>
			<p>“It is time to say that this Ayrton was a traitor. He was, indeed, the boatswain’s mate of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>; but, after some dispute with his captain, he had tried to excite the crew to mutiny and seize the ship, and Captain Grant had put him ashore, the 8th of April, 1832, on the west coast of Australia, and had gone off, leaving him there, which was no more than right.</p>
			<p>“Thus this wretch knew nothing of the shipwreck of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>. He had just learned it from Lord Glenarvan’s recital! Since his abandonment, he had become, under the name of Ben Joyce, the leader of some escaped convicts; and, if he impudently asserted the ship had been lost on the east coast, if he urged Lord Glenarvan to go in that direction, it was in the hope of separating him from his ship, of seizing the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, and of making this yacht a pirate of the Pacific.”</p>
			<p>Here the Unknown stopped for a moment. His voice trembled, but he began again in these words:⁠—</p>
			<p>“The expedition across Australia set out. It was naturally unfortunate, since Ayrton, or Ben Joyce, whichever you wish, led it, sometimes preceded, sometimes followed by the band of convicts, who had been informed of the plot.</p>
			<p>“Meanwhile, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> had been taken to Melbourne to await instructions. It was therefore necessary to persuade Lord Glenarvan to order her to leave Melbourne and to proceed to the east coast of Australia, where it would be easy to seize her. After having led the expedition sufficiently near this coast, into the midst of vast forests, where all resources were wanting, Ayrton obtained a letter which he was ordered to deliver to the mate of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>; a letter which gave the order directing the yacht to proceed immediately to the east coast, to Twofold Bay, a place some days journey from the spot where the expedition had halted. It was at this place that Ayrton had given the rendezvous to his accomplices.</p>
			<p>“At the moment when this letter was to have been sent, the traitor was unmasked and was obliged to flee. But this letter, giving him the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, must be had at any cost. Ayrton succeeded in getting hold of it, and, in two days afterwards, he was in Melbourne.</p>
			<p>“So far, the criminal had succeeded in his odious projects. He could take the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> to this Twofold Bay, where it would be easy for the convicts to seize her; and, her crew massacred, Ben Joyce would be master of the sea. Heaven stopped him in the consummation of these dark designs.</p>
			<p>“Ayrton, having reached Melbourne, gave the letter to the mate, Tom Austin, who made ready to execute the order; but one can judge of the disappointment and the rage of Ayrton, when, the second day out, he learned that the mate was taking the ship, not to Twofold Bay on the east coast of Australia, but to the east coast of New Zealand. He wished to oppose this, but the mate showed him his order. And, in truth, by a providential error of the French geographer who had written this letter, the eastern coast of New Zealand had been named as their place of destination.</p>
			<p>“All the plans of Ayrton had miscarried. He tried to mutiny. They put him in irons; and he was taken to the coast of New Zealand, unaware of what had become of his accomplices, or of Lord Glenarvan.</p>
			<p>“The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> remained on this coast until the 3rd of March. On that day, Ayrton heard firing. It was a salute from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, and, very soon, Lord Glenarvan and all his party came on board.</p>
			<p>“This is what had happened:⁠—</p>
			<p>“After innumerable fatigues and dangers, Lord Glenarvan had been able to accomplish his journey and arrived at Twofold Bay. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> was not there! He telegraphed to Melbourne, and received a reply:⁠—‘<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> sailed on the 18th. Destination unknown.’</p>
			<p>“Lord Glenarvan could think of but one explanation, that was that the good yacht had fallen into the hands of Ben Joyce, and had become a pirate ship.</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless, Lord Glenarvan did not wish to give up his undertaking. He was an intrepid and a generous man. He embarked on a merchant vessel, which took him to the west coast of New Zealand, and he crossed the country, following the 37th parallel without finding any trace of Captain Grant; but on the other coast, to his great surprise, and by the bounty of Heaven, he found the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, commanded by the mate, which had been waiting for him for five weeks!</p>
			<p>“It was the 3rd of March, 1855. Lord Glenarvan was again on the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, but Ayrton was there also. He was brought before his lordship, who wished to get from this bandit all that he knew concerning Captain Grant. Ayrton refused to speak. Lord Glenarvan told him, then, that at the first port, he would be given over to the English authorities. Ayrton remained silent.</p>
			<p>“The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i> continued along the thirty-seventh parallel. Meanwhile, Lady Glenarvan undertook to overcome the obstinacy of the bandit, and, finally, her influence conquered him. Ayrton, in exchange for what he would tell, proposed to Lord Glenarvan to leave him upon one of the islands in the Pacific, instead of giving him up to the English authorities. Lord Glenarvan, ready to do anything to gain information concerning Captain Grant, consented.</p>
			<p>“Then Ayrton told the history of his life, and declared that he knew nothing about Captain Grant since the day when the latter had left him on the Australian coast.</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless, Lord Glenarvan kept the promise he had made. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, continuing her route, arrived at Tabor Island. It was there that Ayrton was to be left, and it was there, too, that, by a miracle, they found Captain Grant and his two companions. The convict was put upon the island in their stead, and when he left the yacht, Lord Glenarvan spoke to him in these words:⁠—</p>
			<p>“ ‘Here, Ayrton, you will be far from any country, and without any possible means of communicating with your fellow-men. You will not be able to leave this island. You will be alone, under the eye of a God who looks into the depths of our hearts, but you will neither be lost nor neglected, like Captain Grant. Unworthy as you are of the remembrance of men, you will be remembered. I know where you are, Ayrton, and I know where to find you. I will never forget it.’</p>
			<p>“And the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Duncan</i>, setting sail, soon disappeared.</p>
			<p>“This was the 18th of March, 1855.</p>
			<p>“Ayrton was alone; but he lacked neither ammunition nor arms nor seeds. He, the convict, had at his disposal the house built by the honest Captain Grant. He had only to live and to expiate in solitude the crimes which he had committed.</p>
			<p>“Sirs, he repented; he was ashamed of his crimes, and he was very unhappy. He said to himself that, as some day men would come to seek him on this islet, he must make himself worthy to go back with them. How he suffered, the miserable man! How he labored to benefit himself by labor! How he prayed to regenerate himself by prayer!</p>
			<p>“For two years, for three years, it was thus. Ayrton, crushed by this isolation, ever on the watch for a ship to appear upon the horizon of his island, asking himself if the time of expiation was nearly ended, suffered as one has rarely suffered. Oh! but solitude is hard, for a soul gnawed by remorse!</p>
			<p>“But, doubtless, Heaven found this unhappy wretch insufficiently punished, for he fell, little by little, till he became a savage! He felt, little by little, the brute nature taking possession of him. He cannot say whether this was after two or four years of</p>
			<p>abandonment, but at last he became the miserable being whom you found.</p>
			<p>“I need not tell you, sirs, that Ayrton and Ben Joyce and I are one!”</p>
			<p>Smith and his companions rose as this recital was finished. It is hard to say how deeply they were affected! Such misery, such grief, and such despair, had been shown to them!</p>
			<p>“Ayrton,” said Smith, “you have been a great criminal, but Heaven has, doubtless, witnessed the expiation of your crimes. This is proved, in that you have been restored to your fellow-men. Ayrton, you are pardoned! And now, will you be our companion?”</p>
			<p>The man drew back.</p>
			<p>“Here is my hand,” said the engineer.</p>
			<p>Ayrton darted forward and seized it, great tears streaming from his eyes.</p>
			<p>“Do you desire to live with us?” asked Smith.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith, let me have yet a little time,” he answered, “let me remain alone in the house at the corral!”</p>
			<p>“Do as you wish, Ayrton,” responded Smith.</p>
			<p>The unhappy man was about retiring, when Smith asked him a last question.</p>
			<p>“One word more, my friend. Since it is your wish to live in solitude, why did you throw that paper, which put us in the way of finding you, into the sea?”</p>
			<p>“A paper?” answered Ayrton, who seemed not to understand what was said.</p>
			<p>“Yes, that paper, which we found enclosed in a bottle, and which gave the exact situation of Tabor Island?”</p>
			<p>The man put his hand to his forehead, and, after some reflection, said:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I never threw any paper into the sea!”</p>
			<p>“Never!” cried Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“Never!”</p>
			<p>And then, inclining his head, Ayrton left the room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
