<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 53</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-53" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">LIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">An inexplicable mystery⁠—Herbert’s convalescence⁠—The unexplored parts of the island⁠—Preparations for departure⁠—The first day⁠—Night⁠—Second day⁠—The <span xml:lang="mi">kauris</span>⁠—Cassowaries⁠—Footprints in the sand⁠—Arrival at reptile end.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Spilett took the box and opened it. It contained a white powder, which he tasted. Its extreme bitterness was unmistakable. It was indeed that precious alkaloid, the true anti-periodic.</p>
			<p>It was necessary to administer it to Herbert without delay. How it came there could be discussed later.</p>
			<p>Spilett called for some coffee, and Neb brought a lukewarm infusion, in which the reporter placed eighteen grains of quinine and gave the mixture to Herbert to drink.</p>
			<p>There was still time, as the third attack of the fever had not yet manifested itself. And, indeed, it did not return. Moreover, everyone became hopeful. The mysterious influence was again about them, and that too in a moment when they had despaired of its aid.</p>
			<p>After a few hours, Herbert rested more quietly, and the colonists could talk of the incident. The intervention of this unknown being was more evident than ever, but how had he succeeded in getting in to Granite House during the night? It was perfectly inexplicable, and, indeed, the movements of this “genius of the island” were as mysterious as the genius himself.</p>
			<p>The quinine was administered to Herbert every three hours, and the next day the lad was certainly better. It is true he was not out of danger, since these fevers are often followed by dangerous relapses; but, then, here was the specific, and, doubtless, not far off, the one who had brought it. In two days more Herbert became convalescent. He was still feeble, but there had been no relapse, and he cheerfully submitted to the rigorous diet imposed upon him. He was so anxious to get well.</p>
			<p>Pencroff was beside himself with joy. After the critical period had been safely passed he seized the reporter in his arms, and called him nothing but Doctor Spilett.</p>
			<p>But the true physician was still to be found.</p>
			<p>“We will find him!” said the sailor.</p>
			<p>The year 1867, during which the colonists had been so hardly beset, came to an end, and the new year began with superb weather. A fine warmth, a tropical temperature, moderated by the sea breeze. Herbert’s bed was drawn close to the window, where he could inhale long draughts of the salt, salubrious air. His appetite began to return, and what tempting savory morsels Neb prepared for him!</p>
			<p>“It made one wish to be ill,” said Pencroff.</p>
			<p>During this time the convicts had not shown themselves, neither was there any news of Ayrton. The engineer and Herbert still hoped to get him back, but the others thought that the unhappy man had succumbed. In a month’s time, when the lad should have regained his strength, the important search would be undertaken, and all these questions set at rest.</p>
			<p>During January the work on the plateau consisted simply in collecting the grain and vegetables undestroyed in the work of devastation, and planting some for a late crop during the next season. Smith preferred to wait till the island was rid of the convicts before he repaired the damage to the mill, poultry-yard, and stable.</p>
			<p>In the latter part of the month Herbert began to take some exercise. He was eighteen years old, his constitution was splendid, and from this moment the improvement in his condition was visible daily.</p>
			<p>By the end of the month he walked on the shore and over the plateau, and strengthened himself with sea-baths. Smith felt that the day for the exploration could be set, and the 15th of February was chosen. The nights at this season were very clear, and would, therefore, be advantageous to the search.</p>
			<p>The necessary preparations were begun. These were important, as the colonists had determined not to return to Granite House until their double end had been obtained⁠—to destroy the convicts and find Ayrton, if he was still alive; and to discover the being who presided so efficiently over the destinies of the colony.</p>
			<p>The colonists were familiar with all the eastern coast of the island between Claw Cape and the Mandibles; with Tadorn’s Fens; the neighborhood of Lake Grant; the portion of Jacamar Wood lying between the road to the corral and the Mercy; the courses of the Mercy and Red Creek, and those spurs of Mount Franklin where the corral was located.</p>
			<p>They had partially explored the long sweep of Washington Bay from Claw Cape to Reptile End; the wooded and marshy shore of the west coast, and the interminable downs which extended to the half-open mouth of Shark Gulf.</p>
			<p>But they were unacquainted with the vast woods of Serpentine Peninsula; all the right bank of the Mercy; the left bank of Fall River, and the confused mass of ravines and ridges which covered three-fourths of the base of Mount Franklin on the west, north, and east, and where, doubtless, there existed deep recesses. Therefore, many thousands of acres had not yet been explored.</p>
			<p>It was decided that the expedition should cross the Forest of the Far West, in such a manner as to go over all that part situated on the right of the Mercy. Perhaps it would have been better to have gone at once to the corral, where it was probable the convicts had either pillaged the place or installed themselves there. But either the pillage was a work accomplished or the convicts had purposed to entrench themselves there, and it would always be time to dislodge them.</p>
			<p>So the first plan was decided upon, and it was resolved to cut a road through these woods, placing Granite House in communication with the end of the peninsula, a distance of sixteen or seventeen miles.</p>
			<p>The wagon was in perfect order. The onagers, well rested, were in excellent condition for a long pull. Victuals, camp utensils, and the portable stove, were loaded into the wagon, together with a careful selection of arms and ammunition.</p>
			<p>No one was left in Granite House; even Top and Jup took part in the expedition. The inaccessible dwelling could take care of itself.</p>
			<p>Sunday, the day before the departure, was observed as a day of rest and prayer, and on the morning of the 15th Smith took the measures necessary to defend Granite House from invasion. The ladders were carried to the Chimneys and buried there, the basket of the elevator was removed, and nothing left of the apparatus. Pencroff, who remained behind in Granite House, saw to this latter, and then slid down to the ground by means of a double cord which, dropped to the ground, severed the last connection between the entrance and the shore.</p>
			<p>The weather was superb.</p>
			<p>“It is going to be a warm day,” said the reporter, joyfully.</p>
			<p>“But, Doctor Spilett,” said Pencroff, “our road is under the trees, and we will never see the sun!”</p>
			<p>“Forward!” said the engineer.</p>
			<p>The wagon was ready on the bank. The reporter insisted on Herbert taking a seat in it, at least for the first few hours. Neb walked by the onagers. Smith, the reporter, and the sailor went on ahead. Top bounded off into the grass; Jup took a seat beside Herbert, and the little party started.</p>
			<p>The wagon went up the left bank of the Mercy, across the bridge, and there, leaving the route to Balloon Harbor to the left, the explorers began to make a way through the forest.</p>
			<p>For the first two miles, the trees grew sufficiently apart to permit the wagon to proceed easily, without any other obstacle than here and there a stump or some bushes to arrest their progress. The thick foliage made a cool shadow over the ground. Birds and beasts were plenty, and reminded the colonists of their early excursions on the island.</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless,” remarked Smith, “I notice that the animals are more timid than formerly. These woods have been recently traversed by the convicts, and we shall certainly find their traces.”</p>
			<p>And, indeed, in many places, they saw where a party of men had passed, or built a fire, but in no one place was there a definite camp.</p>
			<p>The engineer had charged his companions to abstain from hunting, so as not to make the convicts aware of their presence by the sound of firearms.</p>
			<p>In the afternoon, some six miles from Granite House, the advance became very difficult, and they had to pass certain thickets, into which Top and Jup were sent as skirmishers.</p>
			<p>The halt for the night was made, nine miles from Granite House, on the bank of a small affluent to the Mercy, of whose existence they had been unaware. They had good appetites, and all made a hearty supper, after which the camp was carefully organized, in order to guard against a surprise from the convicts. Two of the colonists kept guard together in watches of two hours, but Herbert, in spite of his wishes, was not allowed to do duty.</p>
			<p>The night passed without incident. The silence was unbroken save by the growling of jaguars and the chattering of monkeys, which seemed particularly to annoy Jup.</p>
			<p>The next day, they were unable to accomplish more than six miles. Like true “frontiersmen,” the colonists avoided the large trees and cut down only the smaller ones, so that their road was a winding one.</p>
			<p>During the day Herbert discovered some specimens of the tree ferns, with vase-shaped leaves, and the <i xml:lang="mi">algarobabeau</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> John’s bread), which the onagers eat greedily. Splendid <span xml:lang="mi">kauris</span>, disposed in groups, rose to a height of two hundred feet, their cylindrical trunks surmounted by a crown of verdure.</p>
			<p>As to fauna, they discovered no new specimens, but they saw, without being able to approach them, a couple of large birds, such as are common in Australia, a sort of cassowary, called emus, which were five feet high, of brown plumage, and belonged to the order of runners. Top tried his best to catch them, but they outran him easily, so great was their speed.</p>
			<p>The colonists again found traces of the convicts. Near a recently-extinguished fire they found footprints, which they examined with great attention. By measuring these tracks they were able to determine the presence of five men. The five convicts had evidently camped here; but⁠—and they made minute search⁠—they could not discover a sixth track, which would have been that of Ayrton.</p>
			<p>“Ayrton is not with them!” said Herbert.</p>
			<p>“No,” replied Pencroff, “the wretches have shot him.”</p>
			<p>“But they must have a den, to which we can track them.”</p>
			<p>“No,” replied the reporter. “It is more likely that they intend to camp about in places, after this manner, until they become masters of the island.”</p>
			<p>“Masters of the island!” cried the sailor. “Masters of the island, indeed” he repeated in a horrified voice. Then he added:⁠—</p>
			<p>“The ball in my gun is the one which wounded Herbert and it will do its errand!”</p>
			<p>But this just reprisal would not restore Ayrton to life, and the only conclusion to be drawn from the footprints was that they would never see him again!</p>
			<p>That evening the camp was made fourteen miles front Granite House, and Smith estimated that it was still five miles to Reptile End.</p>
			<p>The next day this point was reached, and the full length of the forest had been traversed; but nothing indicated the retreat of the convicts, nor the asylum of the mysterious unknown.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
