<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 35</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span></h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Departure decided upon—Preparations—The three passengers—The first night—The second night—Tabor Island—Search on the shore—Search in the woods—No one—Animals—Plants—A house—Deserted.</p>
			</header>
			<p>“Some one shipwrecked!” cried Pencroff, “abandoned some hundred miles from us upon Tabor Island! Oh! Mr. Smith, you will no longer oppose my project!”</p>
			<p>“No, Pencroff, and you must leave as soon as possible.”.</p>
			<p>“To-morrow?”</p>
			<p>“To-morrow.”</p>
			<p>The engineer held the paper which he had taken from the bottle in his hand. He considered for a few moments, and then spoke:—</p>
			<p>“From this paper, my friends,” said he, “and from the manner in which it is worded, we must conclude that, in the first place, the person cast away upon Tabor Island is a man well informed, since he gives the latitude and longitude of his island exactly; secondly, that he is English or American, since the paper is written in English.”</p>
			<p>“That is a logical conclusion,” answered Spilett, “and the presence of this person explains the arrival of the box on our coast. There has been a shipwreck, since some one has been shipwrecked. And he is fortunate in that Pencroff had the idea of building this boat and even of trying it to-day, for in twenty-four hours the bottle would have been broken on the rocks.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed,!’ said Herbert, “it is a happy chance that the Good Luck passed by the very spot where this bottle was floating.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t it seem to you odd?” asked Smith of Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“It seems fortunate, that’s all,” replied the sailor. “Do you see anything extraordinary in it, sir? This bottle must have gone somewhere, and why not here as well as anywhere else?”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you are right, Pencroff,” responded the engineer, “and nevertheless—”</p>
			<p>“But,” interrupted Herbert, “nothing proves that this bottle has floated in the water for a long time.”</p>
			<p>“Nothing,” responded Spilett, “and moreover the paper seems to have been recently written. What do you think, Cyrus?”</p>
			<p>“It is hard to decide.” answered Smith..</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Pencroff had not been idle. He had gone about, and the Good Luck, with a free wind, all her sails drawing, was speeding toward Claw Cape. Each one thought of the castaway on Tabor Island. Was there still time to save him? This was a great event in the lives of the colonists. They too were but castaways, but it was not probable that another had been as favored as they had been, and it was their duty to hasten at once to this one’s relief. By 2 o’clock Claw Cape was doubled, and the Good Luck anchored at the mouth of the Mercy.</p>
			<p>That evening all the details of the expedition were arranged. It was agreed that Herbert and Pencroff, who understood the management of a boat, were to undertake the voyage alone. By leaving the next day, the 11th of October, they would reach the island, supposing the wind continued, in forty-eight hours. Allowing for one day there, and three or four days to return in, they could calculate on being at Lincoln Island again on the 17th. The weather was good, the barometer rose steadily, the wind seemed as if it would continue, everything favored these brave men, who were going so far to do a humane act.</p>
			<p>Thus, Smith, Neb, and Spilett was to remain at Granite House; but at the last moment, the latter, remembering his duty as reporter to the New York <i>Herald</i>, having declared that he would swim rather than lose such an opportunity, was allowed to take part in the voyage.</p>
			<p>The evening was employed in putting bedding, arms, munitions, provisions, etc., on board, and the next morning, by 5 o’clock, the good-byes were spoken, and Pencroff, hoisting the sails, headed for Claw Cape, which had to be doubled before taking the route to the southeast. The Good Luck was already a quarter of a mile from shore when her passengers saw upon the heights of Granite House two men signalling farewells. They were Smith and Neb, from whom they were separating for the first time in fifteen months.</p>
			<p>Pencroff, Herbert, and the reporter returned the signal, and soon Granite House disappeared behind the rocks of the Cape.</p>
			<p>During the morning, the Good Luck remained in view of the southern coast of the island, which appeared like a green clump of trees, above which rose Mount Franklin. The heights, lessened by distance, gave it an appearance little calculated to attract ships on its coasts. At 1 o’clock Reptile Promontory was passed ten miles distant. It was therefore impossible to distinguish the western coast, which extended to the spurs of the mountain, and three hours later, Lincoln Island had disappeared behind the horizon.</p>
			<p>The Good Luck behaved admirably. She rode lightly over the seas and sailed rapidly. Pencroff had set his topsail, and with a fair wind he followed a straight course by the compass. Occasionally Herbert took the tiller, and the hand of the young lad was so sure, that the sailor had nothing to correct.</p>
			<p>Spilett chatted with one and the other, and lent a hand when necessary in manœuvring the sloop. Captain Pencroff was perfectly satisfied with his crew, and was constantly promising them an extra allowance of grog.</p>
			<p>In the evening the slender crescent of the moon glimmered in the twilight. The night came on dark but starlit, with the promise of a fine day on the morrow. Pencroff thought it prudent to take in the topsail, which was perhaps an excess of caution in so still a night, but he was a careful sailor, and was not to be blamed.</p>
			<p>The reporter slept during half the night, Herbert and Pencroff taking two-hour turns at the helm. The sailor had as much confidence in his pupil as he had in himself, and his trust was justified by the coolness and judgment of the lad. Pencroff set the course as a captain to his helmsman, and Herbert did not allow the Good Luck to deviate a point from her direction.</p>
			<p>The night and the next day passed quietly and safely. The Good Luck held her southeast course, and, unless she was drawn aside by some unknown current, she would make Tabor Island exactly. The sea was completely deserted, save that sometimes an albatross or frigate-bird passed within gun-shot distance.</p>
			<p>“And yet,” said Herbert, “this is the season when the whalers usually come towards the southern part of the Pacific. I don’t believe that there is a sea more deserted than this.”</p>
			<p>“It is not altogether deserted,” responded Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“Why we are here. Do you take us for porpoises or our sloop for driftwood?” And Pencroff laughed at his pleasantry.</p>
			<p>By evening they calculated the distance traversed at 130 miles, or three and a third miles an hour. The breeze was dying away, but they had reason to hope, supposing their course to have been correct, that they would sight Tabor Island at daylight.</p>
			<p>No one of the three slept during this night. While waiting for morning they experienced the liveliest emotions. There was so much uncertainty in their enterprise. Were they near the island? Was the shipwrecked man still there? Who was he? Might not his presence disturb the unity of the colony? Would he, indeed, consent to exchange one prison for another? All these questions, which would doubtless be answered the next day, kept them alert, and at the earliest dawn they began to scan the western horizon.</p>
			<p>What was the joy of the little crew when towards 6 o’clock Pencroff shouted—</p>
			<p>“Land!”</p>
			<p>In a few hours they would be upon its shore.</p>
			<p>The island was a low coast, raised but a little above the waves, not more than fifteen miles away. The sloop, which had been heading south of it, was put about, and, as the sun rose, a few elevations became visible here and there.</p>
			<p>“It is not as large as Lincoln Island,” said Herbert, “and probably owes its origin to like submarine convulsions.”</p>
			<p>By 11 o’clock the Good Luck was only two miles distant from shore, and Pencroff, while seeking some place to land, sailed with extreme caution through these unknown waters. They could see the whole extent of this island, on which were visible groups of gum and other large trees of the same species as those on Lincoln Island. But, it was astonishing, that no rising smoke indicated that the place was inhabited, nor was any signal visible upon the shore. Nevertheless the paper had been precise: it stated that there was a shipwrecked man here; and he should have been upon the watch.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the Good Luck went in through the tortuous passages between the reefs, Herbert steering, and the sailor stationed forward, keeping a sharp lookout, with the halliards in his hand, ready to run down the sail. Spilett, with the spy-glass, examined all the shore without perceiving anything. By noon the sloop touched the beach, the anchor was let go, the sails furled, and the crew stepped on shore.</p>
			<p>There could be no doubt that that was Tabor Island, since the most recent maps gave no other land in all this part of the Pacific.</p>
			<p>After having securely moored the sloop, Pencroff and his companion, well armed, ascended the coast towards a round hill, some 250 feet high, which was distant about half a mile, from the summit of which they expected to have a good view of the island.</p>
			<p>The explorers followed the edge of grassy plain which ended at the foot of the hill. Rock-pigeons and sea-swallows circled about them, and in the woods bordering the plain to the left they heard rustlings in the bushes and saw movements in the grass indicating the presence of very timid animals, but nothing, so far, indicated that the island was inhabited.</p>
			<p>Having reached the hill the party soon climbed to its summit, and their gaze traversed the whole horizon. They were certainly upon an island, not more than six miles in circumference, in shape a long oval, and but little broken by inlets or promontories. All around it, the sea, absolutely deserted, stretched away to the horizon.</p>
			<p>This islet differed greatly from Lincoln Island in that it was covered over its entire surface with woods, and the uniform mass of verdure clothed two or three less elevated hills. Obliquely to the oval of the island a small stream crossed a large grassy plain and emptied into the sea on the western side by a narrowed mouth.</p>
			<p>“The place is small,” said Herbert.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” replied the sailor. “It would have been too small for us.”</p>
			<p>“And,” added the reporter, “it seems uninhabited.”</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless,” said Pencroff, “let us go down and search.”</p>
			<p>The party returned to the sloop, and they decided to walk round the entire island before venturing into its interior, so that no place could escape their investigation.</p>
			<p>The shore was easily followed, and the explorers proceeded towards the south, starting up flocks of aquatic birds and numbers of seals, which latter threw themselves into the sea as soon as they caught sight of the party.</p>
			<p>“Those beasts are not looking on man for the first time. They fear what they know,” said the reporter.</p>
			<p>An hour after their departure the three had reached the southern point of the islet, which terminated in a sharp cape, and they turned towards the north, following the western shore, which was sandy, like the other, and bounded by a thick wood.</p>
			<p>In four hours after they had set out the party had made the circuit of the island, without having seen any trace of a habitation, and not even a footprint. It was most extraordinary, to say the least, and it seemed necessary to believe that the place was not and had not been inhabited. Perhaps, after all, the paper had been in the water for many months, or even years, and it was possible, in that case, that the shipwrecked one had been rescued or that he had died from suffering.</p>
			<p>The little party, discussing all sorts of possibilities, made a hasty dinner on board the sloop, and at 5 o’clock started to explore the woods.</p>
			<p>Numerous animals fled before their approach, principally, indeed solely, goats and pigs, which it was easy to see were of European origin. Doubtless some whaler had left them here, and they had rapidly multiplied. Herbert made up his mind to catch two or three pairs to take back to Lincoln Island.</p>
			<p>There was no longer any doubt that the island had previously been visited. This was the more evident as in passing through the forest they saw the traces of pathways, and the trunks of trees felled by the hatchet, and all about, marks of human handiwork; but these trees had been felled years before; the hatchet marks were velvetted with moss, and the pathways were so overgrown with grass that it was difficult to discover them.</p>
			<p>“But,” observed Spilett, “this proves that men not only landed here, but that they lived here. Now who and how many were these men, and how many remain?”</p>
			<p>“The paper speaks of but one,” replied Herbert.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Pencroff, “if he is still here we cannot help finding him.”</p>
			<p>The exploration was continued, following diagonally across the island, and by this means the sailor and his companions reached the little stream which flowed towards the sea.</p>
			<p>If animals of European origin, if works of human hands proved conclusively that man had once been here, many specimens of the vegetable kingdom also evidenced the fact. In certain clear places it was plain that kitchen vegetables had formerly been planted. And Herbert was overjoyed when he discovered potatoes, succory, sorrel, carrots, cabbage, and turnips, the seeds of which would enrich the garden at Granite House.</p>
			<p>“Indeed,” exclaimed Pencroff, “this will rejoice Neb. Even if we don’t find the man, our voyage will not have been useless, and Heaven will have rewarded us.”</p>
			<p>“Doubtless,” replied Spilett, “but from the conditions of these fields, it looks as if the place had not been inhabited for a long time.”</p>
			<p>“An inhabitant, whoever he was, would not neglect anything so important as this.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, this man has gone. It must be—”</p>
			<p>“That the paper had been written a long time ago?”</p>
			<p>“Undoubtedly.”</p>
			<p>“And that the bottle had been floating in the sea a good while before it arrived at Lincoln Island?”</p>
			<p>“Why not?” said Pencroff. “But, see, it is getting dark,” he added, “and I think we had better give over the search.”</p>
			<p>“We will go aboard, and to-morrow we will begin again,” replied the reporter.</p>
			<p>They were about adopting this counsel, when Herbert, pointing to something dimly visible, through the trees, exclaimed:—</p>
			<p>“There’s a house!”</p>
			<p>All three directed their steps towards the place indicated, and they made out in the twilight that it was built of planks, covered with heavy tarpaulin. The door, half closed, was pushed back by Pencroff, who entered quickly.</p>
			<p>The place was empty!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
