<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Going toward the coast⁠—Troops of monkeys⁠—A new watercourse⁠—Why the tide was not felt⁠—A forest on the shore⁠—Reptile promontory⁠—Spilett makes Herbert envious⁠—The bamboo fusilade.</p>
			</header>
			<p>It was six o’clock when the colonists, after an early breakfast, started with the intention of reaching the coast by the shortest route. Smith had estimated that it would take them two hours, but it must depend largely on the nature of the obstacles in the way. This part of the Far West was covered with trees, like an immense thicket composed of many different species. It was, therefore, probable that they would have to make a way with hatchets in hand⁠—and guns also, if they were to judge from the cries heard over night.</p>
			<p>The exact position of the camp had been determined by the situation of Mount Franklin, and since the volcano rose less than three miles to the north, it was only necessary to go directly toward the southwest to reach the west coast.</p>
			<p>After having seen to the mooring of the canoe, the party started, Neb and Pencroff carrying sufficient provisions to last the little troop for two days at least. They were no longer hunting, and the engineer recommended his companions to refrain from unnecessary firing, so as not to give warning of their presence on the coast. The first blows of the hatchet were given in the bushes just above the cascade, while Smith, compass in hand, indicated the route. The forest was, for the most part, composed of such trees as had already been recognized about the lake and on Prospect Plateau. The colonists could advance but slowly, and the engineer believed that in time their route would join with that of Red Creek.</p>
			<p>Since their departure, the party had descended the low declivities which constituted the orography of the island, over a very dry district, although the luxuriant vegetation suggested either a hydrographic network permeating the ground beneath, or the proximity to some stream. Nevertheless, Smith did not remember having seen, during the excursion to the crater, any other water courses than Bed Creek and the Mercy.</p>
			<p>During the first few hours of the march, they saw troops of monkeys, who manifested the greatest astonishment at the sight of human beings. Spilett laughingly asked if these robust quadrumanes did not look upon their party as degenerate brethren; and, in truth, the simple pedestrians, impeded at each step by the bushes, entangled in the lianas, stopped by tree trunks, did not compare favorably with these nimble animals, which bounded from branch to branch, moving about without hindrance. These monkeys were very numerous, but, fortunately, they did not manifest any hostile disposition.</p>
			<p>They saw, also, some wild boars, some agoutis, kangaroos, and other rodents, and two or three koalas, which latter Pencroff would have been glad to shoot.</p>
			<p>“But,” said he, “the hunt has not begun. Play now, my friends, and we will talk to you when we come back.”</p>
			<p>At half-past nine, the route, which bore directly southwest, was suddenly interrupted by a rapid stream, rushing over rocks, and pent in between banks but thirty or forty feet apart. It was deep and clear, but absolutely unnavigable.</p>
			<p>“We are stopped!” cried Neb.</p>
			<p>“No,” replied Herbert; “we can swim such a brook as this.”</p>
			<p>“Why should we do that?” answered Smith. “It is certain that this creek empties into the sea. Let us keep to this bank and I will be astonished if it does not soon bring us to the coast. Come on!”</p>
			<p>“One minute,” said the reporter. “The name of this creek, my friends? We must not leave our geography incomplete.”</p>
			<p>“True enough,” said Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“You name it, my boy,” said the engineer, addressing Herbert.</p>
			<p>“Will not it be better to wait till we have discovered its mouth?” asked Herbert.</p>
			<p>“Right,” replied Smith, “let us push on.”</p>
			<p>“Another minute,” exclaimed Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“What more?” demanded the reporter.</p>
			<p>“If hunting is forbidden, fishing is allowed, I suppose,” said the sailor.</p>
			<p>“We haven’t the time to waste,” answered the engineer.</p>
			<p>“But just five minutes,” pleaded Pencroff; “I only want five minutes for the sake of breakfast!” And lying down on the bank he plunged his arms in the running waters and soon brought up several dozen of the fine crawfish which swarmed between the rocks.</p>
			<p>“These will be good!” cried Neb, helping the sailor.</p>
			<p>“Did not I tell you that the island had everything but tobacco?” sighed the sailor.</p>
			<p>It took but five minutes to fill a sack with these little blue crustaceæ, and then the journey was resumed.</p>
			<p>By following the bank the colonists moved more freely. Now and then they found traces of large animals which came to the stream for water, but they found no sign of human beings, and they were not yet in that part of the Far West where the peccary had received the leaden pellet which cost Pencroff a tooth.</p>
			<p>Smith and his companions judged, from the fact that the current rushed towards the sea with such rapidity, that they must be much farther from the coast than they imagined, because at this time the tide was rising, and its effect would have been visible near the mouth of the creek. The engineer was greatly astonished, and often consulted his compass to be sure that the stream, was not returning towards the depths of the forest. Meantime, its waters, gradually widening, became less tumultuous. The growth of trees on the right bank was much denser than on the left, and it was impossible to see through this thicket; but these woods were certainly not inhabited, or Top would have discovered it. At half-past ten, to the extreme surprise of Smith, Herbert, who was walking some paces ahead, suddenly stopped, exclaiming, “The sea!”</p>
			<p>And a few minutes later the colonists, standing upon the border of the forest, saw the western coast of the island spread before them.</p>
			<p>But what a contrast was this coast to the one on which chance had thrown them! No granite wall, no reef in the offing, not even a beach. The forest formed the shore, and its furthermost trees, washed by the waves, leaned over the waters. It was in no sense such a beach as is usually met with, composed of vast reaches of sand or heaps of rocks, but a fine border of beautiful trees. The bank was raised above the highest tides, and upon this rich soil, supported by a granite base, the splendid monarchs of the forest seemed to be as firmly set as were those which stood in the interior of the island.</p>
			<p>The colonists stood in a hollow by a tiny rivulet, which served as a neck to the other stream; but, curiously enough, these waters, instead of emptying into the sea by a gently sloping opening, fell from a height of more than forty feet⁠—which fact explained why the rising tide did not affect the current. And, on this account, they were unanimous in giving this watercourse the name of Fall River.</p>
			<p>Beyond, towards the north, the forest shore extended for two miles; then the trees became thinner, and, still further on, a line of picturesque heights extended from north to south. On the other hand, all that part of the coast comprised between Fall River and the promontory of Reptile End was bordered by masses of magnificent trees, some upright and others leaning over the sea, whose waves lapped their roots. It was evidently, therefore, on this part of the coast that the exploration must be continued, as this shore offered to the castaways, whoever they might be, a refuge, which the other, desert and savage, had refused.</p>
			<p>The weather was beautiful, and from the cliff where the breakfast had been prepared, the view extended far and wide. The horizon was perfectly distinct, without a sail in sight, and upon the coast, as far as could be seen, there was neither boat nor wreck, but the engineer was not willing to be satisfied in this respect, until they had explored the whole distance as far as Serpentine Peninsula.</p>
			<p>After a hurried breakfast he gave the signal to start. Instead of traversing a beach, the colonists followed along the coast, under the trees. The distance to Reptile End was about twelve miles, and, had the way been clear, they could have accomplished it in four hours, but the party were constantly obliged to turn out from the way, or to cut branches, or to break through thickets, and these hindrances multiplied as they proceeded. But they saw no signs of a recent shipwreck on the shore; although, as Spilett observed, as the tide was up, they could not say with certainty that there had not been one.</p>
			<p>This reasoning was just, and, moreover, the incident of the bullet proved, indubitably, that within three months a gun had been fired on the island.</p>
			<p>At five o’clock the extremity of the peninsula was still two miles distant, and it was evident that the colonists would have to camp for the night on the promontory of Reptile End. Happily, game was as plenty here as on the other coast, and birds of different kinds abounded. Two hours later, the party, tired out, reached the promontory. Here the forest border ended, and the shore assumed the usual aspect of a coast. It was possible that an abandoned vessel might be here, but, as the night was falling, it was necessary to postpone the exploration until the morrow.</p>
			<p>Pencroff and Herbert hastened to find a suitable place for a camp. The outskirts of the forest died away here, and near them the lad found a bamboo thicket.</p>
			<p>“Good,” said he, “this is a valuable discovery.”</p>
			<p>“Valuable?” asked Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed, I need not tell you, Pencroff, all its uses, such as for making baskets, paper, and water-pipes; that the larger ones make excellent building material and strong jars. But⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But?”</p>
			<p>“But perhaps you do not know that in India they eat bamboo as we do asparagus.”</p>
			<p>“Asparagus thirty feet high?” cried, Pencroff. “And is it good?”</p>
			<p>“Excellent,” answered the lad. “But they eat only the young sprouts.”</p>
			<p>“Delicious!” cried Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“And I am sure that the pith of young plants preserved in vinegar makes an excellent condiment.”</p>
			<p>“Better and better.”</p>
			<p>“And, lastly, they exude a sweet liquor which makes a pleasant drink.”</p>
			<p>“Is that all?” demanded the sailor.</p>
			<p>“That’s all.”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t it good to smoke?”</p>
			<p>“No, my poor Pencroff, you cannot smoke it!”</p>
			<p>They did not have to search far for a good place for the camp. The rocks, much worn by the action of the sea, had many hollows that would afford shelter from the wind. But just as they were about to enter one of these cavities they were arrested by formidable growlings.</p>
			<p>“Get back!” cried Pencroff, “we have only small shot in our guns, and these beasts would mind it no more than salt!”</p>
			<p>And the sailor, seizing Herbert, dragged him behind some rocks, just as a huge jaguar appeared at the mouth of the cavern. Its skin was yellow, striped with black, and softened off with white under its belly. The beast advanced, and looked about. Its hair was bristling, and its eyes sparkling as if it was not scenting man for the first time.</p>
			<p>Just then Spilett appeared, coming round the high rocks, and Herbert, thinking he had not seen the jaguar, was about rushing towards him, when the reporter, motioning with his hand, continued his approach. It was not his first tiger.</p>
			<p>Advancing within ten paces of the animal, he rested motionless, his gun at his shoulder, not a muscle quivering. The jaguar, crouching back, made a bound towards the hunter, but as it sprung a bullet struck it between the eyes, dropping it dead.</p>
			<p>Herbert and Pencroff rushed to it, and Smith and Neb coming up at the moment, all stopped to look at the splendid animal lying at length upon the sand.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spilett, how I envy you!” cried Herbert, in an excess of natural enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>“Well, my boy, you would have done as well,” answered the reporter.</p>
			<p>“I have been as cool as that!”</p>
			<p>“Only imagine, Herbert, that a jaguar is a hare, and you will shoot him as unconcernedly as anything in the world! And now,” continued the reporter, “since the jaguar has left his retreat I don’t see, my friends, why we should not occupy the place during the night.”</p>
			<p>“But some others may return!” said Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“We will only have to light a fire at the entrance of the cavern,” said the reporter, “and they will not dare to cross the threshold.”</p>
			<p>“To the jaguar house, then,” cried the sailor, dragging the body of the animal after him.</p>
			<p>The colonists went to the abandoned cave, and, while Neb was occupied in skinning the carcass, the others busied themselves with piling a great quantity of dry wood around the threshold. This done they installed themselves in the cave, whose floor was strewn with bones; the arms were loaded for an emergency; and, having eaten supper, as soon as the time for sleep was come, the fire at the entrance was lit.</p>
			<p>Immediately a tremendous fusilade ensued! It was the bamboo which, in burning, exploded like fireworks! The noise, in itself, would have been sufficient to frighten off the bravest beasts.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
