<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 25</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The departure⁠—The rising tide⁠—Elms and other trees⁠—Different plants⁠—The kingfisher⁠—Appearance of the forest⁠—The gigantic <span epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">eucalypti</span>⁠—Why they are called fever-trees⁠—Monkeys⁠—The waterfall⁠—Encampment for the night.</p>
				</header>
				<p>The next day⁠—the 30th of October⁠—everything was prepared for the proposed exploration, which these last events had made so necessary. Indeed, as things had turned out, the colonists could well imagine themselves in a condition to give, rather than to receive, help.</p>
				<p>It was agreed that they ascend the Mercy as far as practicable. They would thus be able to transport their arms and provisions a good part of the way without fatigue.</p>
				<p>It was also necessary to think, not only of what they now carried, but of what they might perhaps bring back to Granite House. If, as all thought, there had been a shipwreck on the coast, they would find many things they wanted on the shore, and the cart would doubtless have proved more convenient than the canoe. But the cart was so heavy and unwieldy that it would have been too hard work to drag it, which fact made Pencroff regret that the box had not only held his half-pound of tobacco, but also a pair of stout New Jersey horses, which would have been so useful to the colony.</p>
				<p>The provisions, already packed by Neb, consisted of enough dried meat, beer, and fermented liquor to last them for the three days which Smith expected they would be absent. Moreover, they counted on being able to replenish their stock at need along the route, and Neb had taken care not to forget the portable stove.</p>
				<p>They took the two wood-choppers’ hatchets to aid in making their way through the thick forest, and also the glass and the pocket compass.</p>
				<p>Of the arms, they chose the two flintlock guns in preference to the others, as the colonists could always renew the flints; whereas the caps could not be replaced. Nevertheless, they took one of the carbines and some cartridges. As for the powder, the barrels held fifty pounds, and it was necessary to take a certain amount of that; but the engineer expected to manufacture an explosive substance, by which it could be saved in the future. To the firearms they added the five cutlasses, in leather scabbards. And thus equipped, the party could venture into the forest with some chance of success.</p>
				<p>Armed in this manner, Pencroff, Herbert, and Neb had all they could desire, although Smith made them promise not to fire a shot unnecessarily.</p>
				<p>At six o’clock the party, accompanied by Top, started for the mouth of the Mercy. The tide had been rising half an hour, and there were therefore some hours yet of the flood which they could make use of. The current was strong, and they did not need to row to pass rapidly up between the high banks and the river. In a few minutes the explorers had reached the turn where, seven months before, Pencroff had made his first raft. Having passed this elbow, the river, flowing from the southwest, widened out under the shadow of the grand evergreen conifers; and Smith and his companions could not but admire the beautiful scenery. As they advanced the species of forest trees changed. On the right bank rose splendid specimens of <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">ulmaceæ</i>, those valuable elms so much sought after by builders, which have the property of remaining sound for a long time in water. There was, also, numerous groups belonging to the same family, among them the micocouliers, the root of which produces a useful oil. Herbert discovered some <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">lardizabalaceæ</i>, whose flexible branches, soaked in water, furnish excellent ropes, and two or three trunks of ebony of a beautiful black color, curiously veined.</p>
				<p>From time to time, where a landing was easy, the canoe stopped, and Spilett, Herbert, and Pencroff, accompanied by Top, explored the bank. In addition to the game, Herbert thought that he might meet with some useful little plant which was not to be despised, and the young naturalist was rewarded by discovering a sort of wild spinach and numerous specimens of the genus cabbage, which would, doubtless, bear transplanting; they were cresses, horseradishes, and a little, velvety, spreading plant, three-feet high, bearing brownish-colored seeds.</p>
				<p>“Do you know what this is?” asked Herbert of the sailor.</p>
				<p>“Tobacco!” cried Pencroff, who had evidently never seen the plant which he fancied so much.</p>
				<p>“No, Pencroff,” answered Herbert, “It is not tobacco, it is mustard.”</p>
				<p>“Only mustard!” exclaimed the other. “Well if you happen to come across a tobacco plant, my boy, do not pass it by.”</p>
				<p>“We will find it someday,” said Spilett.</p>
				<p>“All right,” cried Pencroff, “and then I will be able to say that the island lacks nothing!”</p>
				<p>These plants were taken up carefully and carried back to the canoe, where Cyrus Smith had remained absorbed in his own thoughts.</p>
				<p>The reporter, Herbert, and Pencroff, made many of these excursions, sometimes on the right bank of the Mercy and sometimes upon the left. The latter was less abrupt, but more wooded. The engineer found, by reference to the pocket-compass, that the general direction of the river from its bend was southwest, and that it was nearly straight for about three miles. But it was probable that the direction would change further up, and that it would flow from the spurs of Mount Franklin, which fed its waters in the northwest.</p>
				<p>During one of these excursions Spilett caught a couple of birds with long, slim beaks, slender necks, short wings, and no tails, which Herbert called <i>tinamous</i>, and which they resolved should be the first occupants of the future poultry-yard.</p>
				<p>But the first report of a gun that echoed through the Forests of the Far West, was provoked by the sight of a beautiful bird, resembling a kingfisher.</p>
				<p>“I know it,” cried Pencroff.</p>
				<p>“What do you know?” asked the reporter.</p>
				<p>“That bird! It is the bird which escaped on our first exploration, the one after which we named this part of the forest!”</p>
				<p>“A jacamar!” exclaimed Herbert.</p>
				<p>It was, indeed, one of those beautiful birds, whose harsh plumage is covered with a metallic lustre. Some small shot dropped it to the earth, and Top brought it, and also some touracolories, climbing birds the size of pigeons, to the canoe. The honor of this first shot belonged to the lad, who was pleased enough with the result. The touracolories were better game than the jacamar, the flesh of the latter being tough, but it would have been hard to persuade Pencroff that they had not killed the most delicious of birds.</p>
				<p>It was ten o’clock when the canoe reached the second bend of the river, some five miles from the mouth. Here they stopped half an hour, under the shadow of the trees, for breakfast.</p>
				<p>The river measured from sixty to seventy feet in width, and was five or six feet deep. The engineer had remarked its several affluents, but they were simply unnavigable streams. The Forests of the Far West, or Jacamar Wood, extended farther than they could see, but no where could they detect the presence of man. If, therefore, any persons had been shipwrecked on the island, they had not yet quitted the shore, and it was not in those thick coverts that search must be made for the survivors.</p>
				<p>The engineer began to manifest some anxiety to get to the western coast of the island, distant, as he calculated, about five miles or less. The journey was resumed, and, although the course of the Mercy, sometimes towards the shore, was oftener towards the mountain, it was thought better to follow it as long as possible, on account of the fatigue and loss of time incident to hewing a way through the wood. Soon, the tide having attained its height, Herbert and Neb took the oars, and Pencroff the paddle, and they continued the ascent by rowing.</p>
				<p>It seemed as if the forest of the Far West began to grow thinner. But, as the trees grew farther apart, they profited by the increased space, and attained a splendid growth.</p>
				<p>“Eucalypti!” cried Herbert, descrying some of these superb plants, the loftiest giants of the extra-tropical zone, the congeners of the eucalypti of Australia and New Zealand, both of which countries were situated in the same latitude as Lincoln Island. Some rose 200 feet in height and measured twenty feet in circumference, and their bark, five fingers in thickness, exuded an aromatic resin. Equally wonderful were the enormous specimens of myrtle, their leaves extending edgewise to the sun, and permitting its rays to penetrate and fall upon the ground.</p>
				<p>“What trees!” exclaimed Neb. “Are they good for anything?”</p>
				<p>“Pshaw!” answered Pencroff. “They are like overgrown men, good for nothing but to show in fairs!”</p>
				<p>“I think you’re wrong, Pencroff,” said Spilett, “the eucalyptus wood is beginning to be extensively used in cabinet work.”</p>
				<p>“And I am sure,” added Herbert, “that it belongs to a most useful family,” and thereupon the young naturalist enumerated many species of the plant and their uses.</p>
				<p>Everyone listened to the lad’s lesson in botany, Smith smiling, Pencroff with an indescribable pride. “That’s all very well, Herbert,” answered the sailor, “but I dare swear that of all these useful specimens none are as large as these!”</p>
				<p>“That is so.”</p>
				<p>“Then, that proves what I said,” replied the sailor, “that giants are good for nothing.”</p>
				<p>“There’s where you are wrong, Pencroff,” said the engineer, “these very <span epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">eucalypti</span> are good for something.”</p>
				<p>“For what?”</p>
				<p>“To render the country healthy about them. Do you know what they call them in Australia and New Zealand?”</p>
				<p>“No sir.”</p>
				<p>“They call them ‘fever’ trees.”</p>
				<p>“Because they give it?”</p>
				<p>“No; because they prevent it!”</p>
				<p>“Good. I shall make a note of that,” said the reporter.</p>
				<p>“Note then, my dear Spilett, that it has been proved that the presence of these trees neutralizes marsh miasmas. They have tried this natural remedy in certain unhealthy parts of Europe, and northern Africa, with the best results. And there are no intermittent fevers in the region of these forests, which is a fortunate thing for us colonists of Lincoln Island.”</p>
				<p>“What a blessed island!” cried Pencroff. “It would lack nothing⁠—if it was not⁠—”</p>
				<p>“That will come, Pencroff, we will find it,” answered the reporter; “but now let us attend to our work and push on as far as we can get with the canoe.”</p>
				<p>They continued on through the woods two miles further, the river becoming more winding, shallow, and so narrow that Pencroff pushed along with a pole. The sun was setting, and, as it would be impossible to pass in the darkness through the five or six miles of unknown woods which the engineer estimated lay between them and the coast, it was determined to camp wherever the canoe was obliged to stop.</p>
				<p>They now pushed on without delay through the forest, which grew more dense, and seemed more inhabited, because, if the sailor’s eyes did not deceive him, he perceived troops of monkeys running among the underbrush. Sometimes, two or three of these animals would halt at a distance from the canoe and regard its occupants, as if, seeing men for the first time, they had not then learned to fear them. It would have been easy to have shot some of these quadrumanes, but Smith was opposed to the useless slaughter. Pencroff, however, looked upon the monkey from a gastronomic point of view, and, indeed, as these animals are entirely herberiferous, they make excellent game; but since provisions abounded, it was useless to waste the ammunition.</p>
				<p>Towards four o’clock the navigation of the Mercy became very difficult, its course being obstructed by rocks and aquatic plants. The banks rose higher and higher, and, already, the bed of the stream was confined between the outer spurs of Mount Franklin. Its sources could not be far off, since the waters were fed by the southern watershed of that mountain.</p>
				<p>“Before a quarter of an hour we will have to stop, sir,” said Pencroff.</p>
				<p>“Well, then, we will make a camp for the night.”</p>
				<p>“How far are we from Granite House?” asked Herbert.</p>
				<p>“About seven miles, counting the bends of the river, which have taken us to the northwest.”</p>
				<p>“Shall we keep on?” asked the reporter.</p>
				<p>“Yes, as far as we can get,” answered the engineer. “Tomorrow, at daylight, we will leave the canoe, and traverse, in two hours I hope, the distance which separates us from the coast, and then we will have nearly the whole day in which to explore the shore.”</p>
				<p>“Push on,” cried Pencroff.</p>
				<p>Very soon the canoe grated on the stones at the bottom of the river, which was not more than twenty feet wide. A thick mass of verdure overhung and descended the stream, and they heard the noise of a waterfall, which indicated that some little distance further on there existed a natural barrier.</p>
				<p>And, indeed, at the last turn in the river, they saw the cascade shining through the trees. The canoe scraped over the bottom and then grounded on a rock near the right bank.</p>
				<p>It was five o’clock, and the level rays of the setting sun illuminated the little fall. Above, the Mercy, supplied from a secret source, was hidden by the bushes. The various streams together had made it a river, but here it was but a shallow, limpid brook.</p>
				<p>They made camp in this lovely spot. Having disembarked, a fire was lighted under a group of micocouliers, in whose branches Smith and his companions could, if need be, find a refuge for the night.</p>
				<p>Supper was soon finished, as they were very hungry, and then there was nothing to do but to go to sleep. But some suspicious growling being heard at nightfall, the fire was so arranged as to protect the sleepers by its flames. Neb and Pencroff kept it lit, and perhaps they were not mistaken in believing to have seen some moving shadows among the trees and bushes; but the night passed without accident, and the next day⁠—the 31st of October⁠—by five o’clock all were on foot ready for the start.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
