<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Pencroff’s halloos⁠—A night in the Chimneys⁠—Herbert’s arrow⁠—Smith’s plan⁠—An unexpected solution⁠—What had happened in Granite House⁠—How the colonists obtained a new domestic.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Smith stood silent. His companions searched in the obscurity along the wall, over the ground, for the broken part of the ladder, supposing it had been torn off by the wind. But the ladder had certainly disappeared, although it was impossible to tell in the darkness whether a gust of wind had not carried it up and lodged it on the first ledge.</p>
			<p>“If this is a joke, it’s a pretty poor one,” cried Pencroff. “To get home and not be able to find the staircase, won’t do for tired men.”</p>
			<p>Neb stood in open-mouthed amazement.</p>
			<p>“It could not have been carried away by the wind!” said Herbert.</p>
			<p>“I’m beginning to think that strange things happen in Lincoln Island!” said Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“Strange?” rejoined Spilett. “Why no, Pencroff, nothing is more natural. Somebody has come while we have been absent, and has taken possession of the house and drawn up the ladder!”</p>
			<p>“Someone!” cried the sailor. “Who could it be?”</p>
			<p>“Why, the man who shot the bullet,” answered the reporter. “How else can you explain it?”</p>
			<p>“Very well, if anyone is up there,” replied Pencroff, beginning to get angry, “I will hail him, and he had better answer.”</p>
			<p>And in a voice of thunder the sailor gave a prolonged “Ohe,” which was loudly repeated by the echoes.</p>
			<p>The colonists listened, and thought that they heard a sort of chuckling proceed from Granite House. But there was no answering voice to the sailor, who repeated his appeal in vain.</p>
			<p>Here was an event that would have astonished people the most indifferent, and from their situation the colonists could not be that. To them, the slightest incident was of moment, and certainly during their seven months’ residence nothing equal to this had happened.</p>
			<p>They stood there at the foot of Granite House not knowing what to do or to say. Neb was disconsolate at not being able to get back to the kitchen, especially as the provisions taken for the journey had all been eaten, and they had no present means of renewing them.</p>
			<p>“There is but one thing to do, my friends,” said Smith, “to wait until daylight, and then to be governed by circumstances. Meanwhile let us go to the Chimneys, where we will be sheltered, and, even if we cannot eat, we can sleep.”</p>
			<p>“But who is the ill-mannered fellow that has played us this trick?” asked Pencroff again, who thought it no joke.</p>
			<p>Whoever he was, there was nothing to do but to follow the engineer’s advice. Top, having been ordered to lie down under the windows of Granite House, took his place without complaint. The brave dog remained at the foot of the wall, while his master and his companions took shelter among the rocks.</p>
			<p>The colonists, tired as they were, slept but little. Not only were their beds uncomfortable, but it was certain that their house was occupied at present, and they were unable to get into it. Now Granite House was not only their dwelling, it was their storehouse. Everything they possessed was stored there. It would be a serious thing if this should be pillaged and they should have again to begin at the beginning. In their anxiety, one or the other went out often to see if the dog remained on watch. Smith, alone, waited with his accustomed patience, although he was exasperated at finding himself confronted by something utterly inexplicable, and his reason shrank from the thought that around him, over him, perhaps, was exercising an influence to which he could give no name. Spilett sharing his thoughts, they conversed together in an undertone of those unaccountable events which defied all their knowledge and experience. Certainly, there was a mystery about this island, but how discover it? Even Herbert did not know what to think, and often questioned Smith. As to Neb, he said that this was his master’s business and not his; and if he had not feared offending his companions, the brave fellow would have slept this night as soundly as if he had been in his bed in Granite House.</p>
			<p>Pencroff, however, was very much put out.</p>
			<p>“It’s a joke,” he said. “It’s a joke that is played on us. Well, I don’t like such jokes, and the joker won’t like it, if I catch him!”</p>
			<p>At dawn the colonists, well armed, followed along the shore to the reefs. By five o’clock the closed windows of Granite House appeared through their leafy curtain. Everything, from this side, appeared to be in order, but an exclamation escaped from the colonists when they perceived that the door which they had left closed was wide open. There could be no more doubt that someone was in Granite House. The upper ladder was in its place; but the lower had been drawn up to the threshold. It was evident that the intruders wished to guard against a surprise. As to telling who or how many they were, that was still impossible, as none had yet shown themselves.</p>
			<p>Pencroff shouted again, but without answer.</p>
			<p>“The beggars!” he exclaimed, “to sleep as soundly as if they were at home! Halloo! pirates! bandits! corsairs! sons of John Bull!”</p>
			<p>When Pencroff, as an American, called anyone a “son of John Bull,” he had reached the acme of insult.</p>
			<p>Just then, the day broke and the façade of Granite House was illuminated by the rays of the rising sun. But inside as well as without all was still and calm. It was evident from the position of the ladder that whoever had been inside the house had not come out. But how could they get up to them?</p>
			<p>Herbert conceived the idea of shooting an arrow attached to a cord between the lower rungs of the ladder which were hanging from the doorway: They would thus be able by means of the cord to pull this ladder down, and gain access to Granite House. There was evidently nothing else to do, and with a little skill this attempt might prove successful. Fortunately there were bows and arrows at the Chimneys, and they found there, also, some twenty fathoms of light hibiscus cord. Pencroff unrolled this, and fastened the end to a well-feathered arrow. Then Herbert, having placed the arrow in his bow, took careful aim at the hanging part of the ladder.</p>
			<p>The others stationed themselves some distance in the background to observe what might happen, and the reporter covered the doorway with his carbine.</p>
			<p>The bow bent, the arrow shot upward with the cord, and passed between the two lower rungs of the ladder. The operation had succeeded. But just as Herbert, having caught the end of the cord, was about giving it a pull to make the ladder fall, an arm thrust quickly between the door and the wall seized the ladder and drew it within Granite House.</p>
			<p>“You little beggar!” cried Pencroff. “If a ball would settle you, you would not have to wait long!”</p>
			<p>“But what is it?” demanded Neb.</p>
			<p>“What! didn’t you see?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“Why, it’s a monkey, a macauco, a sapajo, an orang, a baboon, a gorilla, a sagoin! Our house has been invaded by monkeys, which have climbed up the ladder while we were away.”</p>
			<p>And at the moment, as if to prove the truth of what the sailor said, three or four quadrumana threw open the window shutters and saluted the true proprietors of the place with a thousand contortions and grimaces.</p>
			<p>“I knew all the time it was a joke,” cried Pencroff, “But here’s one of the jokers that will pay for the others!” he added, covering a monkey with his gun and firing. All disappeared but, this one, which, mortally wounded, fell to the ground.</p>
			<p>This monkey was very large and evidently belonged to the first order of quadrumana. Whether a chimpanzee, an orang, a gorilla, or a gibbon, it ranked among these anthropomorphi, so called on account of their likeness to the human race. Herbert declared it was an orangoutang, and we all know that the lad understood zoology.</p>
			<p>“What a fine beast!” cried Neb.</p>
			<p>“As fine as you choose!” answered the reporter, “but I don’t see yet how we are going to get in!”</p>
			<p>“Herbert is a good shot,” said the reporter, “and his bow is sure! We will try again⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But these monkeys are mischievous,” cried Pencroff, “and if they don’t come to the windows, we cannot shoot them; and when I think of the damage they can do in the rooms and, in the magazine⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Have patience,” answered Smith. “These animals cannot hold us in check, very long.”</p>
			<p>“I will be sure of that when they are out of there,” rejoined Pencroff, “Can you say how many dozens of these fools there may be?”</p>
			<p>It would have been hard to answer Pencroff, but it was harder to try again the experiment of the arrow, as the lower end of the ladder had been drawn within the doorway, and when they pulled on the cord again, it broke, and the ladder remained, as before.</p>
			<p>It was, indeed, vexatious. Pencroff was in a fury, and, although the situation had a certain comic aspect, he did not think it funny at all. It was evident that the colonists would, eventually, get back into their house and drive out the monkeys, but when and how they could not say.</p>
			<p>Two hours passed, during which the monkeys avoided showing themselves; but they were there, for all that, and, two or three times, a muzzle or paw slipped by the door or the windows, and was saluted by a shot.</p>
			<p>“Let us conceal ourselves,” said the engineer, at length. “And then the monkeys will think we have gone off, and will show themselves again. Let Herbert and Spilett remain hidden behind the rocks and fire on any that appear.”</p>
			<p>The directions of the engineer were followed, and while the reporter and the lad, who were the best shots in the party, took their positions, the others went over the plateau to the forest to shoot some game, as it was breakfast time and they had no food.</p>
			<p>In half an hour the hunters returned with some wild pigeons, which would be pretty good roasted. Not a monkey had shown itself.</p>
			<p>Spilett and Herbert went to their breakfast, while Top kept watch under the windows. Then they returned to their post. Two hours later the situation was unchanged. The quadrumana gave no sign of existence, and it seemed as if they must have disappeared; but it was more likely that, frightened by the death of one of their number and the detonations of the guns, they kept themselves hidden in the chambers or the storeroom of Granite House. And, when the colonists thought of all that was stored in this latter room, the patience which the engineer had recommended turned into irritation, and indeed they could not be blamed for it.</p>
			<p>“It is too bad!” exclaimed the reporter, at length; “and is there no way we can put an end to this?”</p>
			<p>“We must make these beggars give up!” cried Pencroff. “We can readily do it, even if there are twenty of them, in a hand-to hand fight! Oh, is there no way we can get at them?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” replied Smith, struck by an idea.</p>
			<p>“Only one?” rejoined Pencroff. “Well, that’s better than none at all. What is it?”</p>
			<p>“Try to get into Granite House by the old weir,” answered the engineer.</p>
			<p>“Why in the mischief didn’t I think of that!” cried the sailor.</p>
			<p>This was, indeed, the only way to get into Granite House, in order to fight the band and drive them out. It is true that, if they tore down the cemented wall which closed the weir, the work would have all to be done over again; but, fortunately, Smith had not yet effected his design of hiding this opening by covering it again with the lake, as that operation necessitated a good deal of time.</p>
			<p>It was already past noon when the colonists, well armed and furnished with picks and mattocks, left the Chimneys, passed under the windows of Granite House, and, having ordered Top to remain at his post, made ready to climb the left bank of the Mercy, so as to reach Prospect Plateau. But they had hardly gone fifty paces when they heard the loud barkings of the dog, as if making a desperate appeal. All halted.</p>
			<p>“Let us run back,” cried Pencroff. And all did as proposed as fast as possible.</p>
			<p>Arrived at the turn, the whole situation was changed. The monkeys, seized with a sudden fright, startled by some unknown cause, were trying to escape. Two or three were running and springing from window to window, with the agility of clowns. In their fright they seemed to have forgotten to replace the ladder, by which they could easily have descended. In a moment half a dozen were in such a position that they could be shot, and the colonists, taking aim, fired. Some fell, wounded or killed, within the chambers, uttering sharp cries. Others, falling to the ground without, were crushed by the fall, and a few moments afterwards it seemed as if there was not one living quadrumana in Granite House.</p>
			<p>“Hurrah,” said Pencroff, “hurrah, hurrah!”</p>
			<p>“Don’t cheer yet,” said Spilett.</p>
			<p>“Why not?” asked Pencroff. “Ain’t they all killed?”</p>
			<p>“Doubtless; but that does not give us the means of getting in.”</p>
			<p>“Let us go the weir!” exclaimed Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“We will have to,” said the engineer. “Nevertheless it would have been preferable⁠—”</p>
			<p>And at the instant, as if in answer to the observation of the engineer, they saw the ladder slide over the doorsill and roll over to the ground.</p>
			<p>“By the thousand pipes, but that is lucky!” cried Pencroff, looking at Smith.</p>
			<p>“Too lucky!” muttered Smith, springing up the ladder.</p>
			<p>“Take care, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith!” exclaimed Pencroff, “if there should be any sojourners⁠—”</p>
			<p>“We will soon see,” responded the other.</p>
			<p>All his companions followed him and in a moment were within the doorway.</p>
			<p>They searched everywhere. No one was in the chambers or in the storeroom, which remained undisturbed by the quadrumana.</p>
			<p>“And the ladder,” said Pencroff; “where is the gentleman who pushed it down to us?”</p>
			<p>But just then a cry was heard, and a huge monkey, that had taken refuge in the corridor, sprang into the great hall, followed by Neb.</p>
			<p>“Ah, the thief!” cried Pencroff, about to spring with his hatchet at the head of the animal, when Smith stopped him.</p>
			<p>“Spare it, Pencroff.”</p>
			<p>“What, spare this black ape?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is he that has thrown us the ladder,” said the engineer, in a voice so strange, that it was hard to say whether he was in earnest or not.</p>
			<p>Nevertheless, all threw themselves on the monkey, which, after a brave resistance, was thrown down and tied.</p>
			<p>“Ugh!” exclaimed Pencroff; “and now what will we do with it?”</p>
			<p>“Make a servant of it,” answered Herbert, half in earnest, as the lad knew how great was the intelligence of this race of quadrumana.</p>
			<p>The colonists gathered round the monkey and examined it attentively. It appeared to belong to that species of anthropomorphi in which the facial angle is not visibly inferior to that of the Australians or Hottentots. He was an orang of the kind which has neither the ferocity of the baboon nor the macauco, nor the thoughtlessness of the sagoin, nor the impatience of the magot, nor the bad instincts of the cynocephalous. It was of a family of anthropomorphi which has traits indicating a half-human intelligence. Employed in houses, they can wait on the table, do chamber-work, brush clothes, black boots, clean the knives and forks, and empty the bottles, as well as the best trained flunkey. Buffon possessed one of these monkeys, which served him a long time as a zealous and faithful servant.</p>
			<p>The one at present tied in the hall of Granite House was a big fellow, six feet high, deep-chested, and finely built, a medium-sized head, with a sharp facial angle, a well-rounded skull, and a prominent nose, and a skin covered with smooth hair, soft and shining⁠—in short, a finished type of anthropomorphi. Its eyes, somewhat smaller than those of a human being, sparkled with intelligence; its teeth glistened beneath its moustache, and it wore a small nut-brown beard.</p>
			<p>“He is a fine chap,” said Pencroff. “If we only understood his language, one might talk with him!”</p>
			<p>“Then,” said Neb, “are they in earnest, my master? Will we take it as a domestic?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Neb,” said the engineer, smiling. “But you need not be jealous.”</p>
			<p>“And I hope it will make an excellent servant. As it is young its education will be easy, and we will not have to use force to make it mind, nor to pull out its teeth as is sometimes done. It cannot fail to become attached to masters who only treat it well.”</p>
			<p>“And we will do that,” said Pencroff, who having forgotten his recent wrath against the “jokers,” approached the orang and accosted him with:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Hullo, my boy, how goes it?”</p>
			<p>The orang responded with a little grunt, which seemed to denote a not bad temper.</p>
			<p>“You want to join the colony, do you? Would you like to enter the service of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith?”</p>
			<p>The monkey gave another affirmative grunt.</p>
			<p>“And you’ll be satisfied with your board as wages?”</p>
			<p>A third affirmative grunt.</p>
			<p>“His conversation is a little monotonous,” observed Spilett.</p>
			<p>“Well,” replied Pencroff, “the best domestics are those that speak least. And then, no wages! Do you hear, my boy? At first we give you no wages, but we will double them later, if you suit us!”</p>
			<p>Thus the colonists added to their number one who had already done them a service. As to a name, the sailor asked that he should be called, in remembrance of another monkey, Jupiter, or by abbreviation, Jup. And thus, without more ado, Master Jup was installed in Granite House.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
