<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 34</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span></h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Rigging the launch—Attacked by foxes—Jup wounded—Jup nursed—Jup cured—Completion of the launch—Pencroff’s triumph—The good luck—Trial trip, to the south of the island—An unexpected document.</p>
			</header>
			<p>The same evening the hunters returned, fairly loaded down with game, the four men having all they could carry. Top had a circlet of ducks round his neck, and Jup belts of woodcock round his body.</p>
			<p>“See, my master,” cried Neb, “see how we have used our time. Preserves, pies, we will have a good reserve! But some one must help me, and I count upon you, Pencroff.”</p>
			<p>“No, Neb,” responded the sailor, “the rigging of the launch occupies my time, and you will have to do without me.”</p>
			<p>“And you, Master Herbert?”</p>
			<p>“I, Neb, must go to-morrow to the corral.”</p>
			<p>“Then will you help me, Mr. Spilett?”</p>
			<p>“To oblige you, I will, Neb,” answered the reporter, “but I warn you that if you discover your recipes to me I will publish them.”</p>
			<p>“Whenever you choose, sir,” responded Neb; “whenever you choose.”</p>
			<p>And so the next day the reporter was installed as Neb’s aid in his culinary laboratory. But beforehand the engineer had given him the result of the previous day’s exploration, and Spilett agreed with Smith in his opinion that, although he had found out nothing, still there was a secret to be discovered.</p>
			<p>The cold continued a week longer, and the colonists did not leave Granite House excepting to look after the poultry-yard. The dwelling was perfumed by the good odors which the learned manipulations of Neb and the reporter emitted; but all the products of the hunt in the fen had not been made into preserves, and as the game kept perfectly in the intense cold, wild ducks and others, were eaten fresh, and declared better than any waterfowl in the world.</p>
			<p>During the week, Pencroff, assisted by Herbert, who used the sailor’s needle skilfully, worked with such diligence that the sails of the launch were finished. Thanks to the rigging which had been recovered with the envelope of the balloon, hemp cordage was not wanting. The sails were bordered by strong bolt-ropes, and there was enough left to make halliards, shrouds, and sheets. The pulleys were made by Smith on the lathe which he had set up, acting under Pencroff’s instruction. The rigging was, therefore, completed before the launch was finished. Pencroff made a red, white, and blue flag, getting the dye from certain plants; but to the thirty-seven stars representing the thirty-seven States of the Union, the sailor added another star, the star of the “State of Lincoln:” as he considered his island as already annexed to the great republic.</p>
			<p>“And,” said he, “it is in spirit, if it is not in fact!”</p>
			<p>For the present the flag was unfurled from the central window of Granite House and saluted with three cheers.</p>
			<p>Meantime, they had reached the end of the cold season; and it seemed as if this second winter would pass without any serious event, when during the night of the 11th of August, Prospect Plateau was menaced by a complete devastation. After a busy day the colonists were sleeping soundly, when towards 4 o’clock in the morning, they were suddenly awakened by Top’s barking. The dog did not bark this time at the mouth of the pit, but at the door, and he threw himself against it as if he wished to break it open. Jup, also, uttered sharp cries.</p>
			<p>“Be quiet, Top!” cried Neb, who was the first awake.</p>
			<p>But the dog only barked the louder.</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter?” cried Smith. And every one dressing in haste, hurried to the windows and opened them.</p>
			<p>“Beneath them a fall of snow shone white through the darkness. The colonists could see nothing, but they heard curious barkings penetrating the night. It was evident that the shore had been invaded by a number of animals which they could not see.”</p>
			<p>“What can they be?” cried Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“Wolves, jaguars, or monkeys!” replied Neb.</p>
			<p>“The mischief! They can get on to the plateau!” exclaimed the reporter.</p>
			<p>“And our poultry-yard, and our garden!” cried Herbert.</p>
			<p>“How have they got in?” asked Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“They have come through the causeway,” answered the engineer, “which one of us must have forgotten to close!”</p>
			<p>“In truth,” said Spilett, “I remember that I left it open—”</p>
			<p>“A nice mess you have made of it, sir!” cried the sailor.</p>
			<p>“What is done, is done,” replied Spilett. “Let us consider what it is necessary to do!”</p>
			<p>These questions and answers passed rapidly between Smith and his companions. It was certain that the causeway had been passed, that the shore had been invaded by animals, and that, whatever they were, they could gain Prospect Plateau by going up the left bank of the Mercy. It was, therefore, necessary quickly to overtake them, and, if necessary, to fight them!</p>
			<p>“But what are they?” somebody asked a second time, as the barking resounded more loudly.</p>
			<p>Herbert started at the sound, and he remembered having heard it during his first visit to the sources of Red Creek.</p>
			<p>“They are foxes! they are foxes!” he said.</p>
			<p>“Come on!” cried the sailor. And all, armed with hatchets, carbines, and revolvers, hurried into the elevator, and were soon on the shore.</p>
			<p>These foxes are dangerous animals, when numerous or irritated by hunger. Nevertheless, the colonists did not hesitate to throw themselves into the midst of the band, and their first shots, darting bright gleams through the darkness, drove back the foremost assailants.</p>
			<p>It was most important to prevent these thieves from gaining Prospect Plateau, as the garden and the poultry-yard would have been at their mercy, and the result would have been immense, perhaps, irreparable damage, especially to the corn-field. But as the plateau could only be invaded by the left bank of the Mercy, it would suffice to oppose a barrier to the foxes on the narrow portion of the shore comprised between the river and the granite wall.</p>
			<p>This was apparent to all, and under Smith’s direction the party gained this position and disposed themselves so as to form an impassable line. Top, his formidable jaws open, preceded the colonists, and was followed by Jup, armed with a knotty cudgel, which he brandished like a cricket-bat.</p>
			<p>The night was very dark, and it was only by the flash of the discharges that the colonists could perceive their assailants, who numbered at least 100, and whose eyes shone like embers.</p>
			<p>“They must not pass!” cried Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“They shall not pass!” answered the engineer.</p>
			<p>But if they did not it was not because they did not try. Those behind kept pushing on those in front, and it was an incessant struggle; the colonists using their hatchets and revolvers. Already the dead bodies of the foxes were strewn over the ground, but the band did not seem to lessen; and it appeared as if reinforcements were constantly pouring in through the causeway on the shore. Meantime the colonists fought side by side, receiving some wounds, though happily but trifling. Herbert shot one fox, which had fastened itself on Neb like a tiger-cat. Top fought with fury, springing at the throats of the animals and strangling them at once. Jup, armed with his cudgel, laid about him like a good fellow, and it was useless to try to make him stay behind. Gifted, doubtless, with a sight able to pierce the darkness, he was always in the thick of the fight, uttering from time to time a sharp cry, which was with him a mark of extreme jollification. At one time he advanced so far, that by the flash of a revolver he was seen, surrounded by five or six huge foxes, defending himself with rare coolness.</p>
			<p>At length the fight ended in a victory for the colonists, but only after two hours of resistance. Doubtless the dawn of day determined the retreat of the foxes, who scampered off toward the north across the drawbridge, which Neb ran at once to raise. When daylight lit the battlefield, the colonists counted fifty dead bodies upon the shore.</p>
			<p>“And Jup! Where is Jup?” cried Neb.</p>
			<p>Jup had disappeared. His friend Neb called him, and for the first time he did not answer the call. Every one began to search for the monkey, trembling lest they should find him among the dead. At length, under a veritable mound of carcasses, each one marked by the terrible cudgel of the brave animal, they found Jup. The poor fellow still held in his hand the handle of his broken weapon; but deprived of this arm, he had been overpowered by numbers, and deep wounds scored his breast.</p>
			<p>“He’s alive!” cried Neb, who knelt beside him.</p>
			<p>“And we will save him,” answered the sailor, “We will nurse him as one of ourselves!”</p>
			<p>It seemed as if Jup understood what was said, for he laid his head on Pencroff’s shoulder as if to thank him. The sailor himself was wounded, but his wounds, like those of his companions, were trifling, as thanks to their firearms, they had always been able to keep the assailants at a distance. Only the orang was seriously hurt.</p>
			<p>Jup, borne by Neb and Pencroff, was carried to the elevator, and lifted gently to Granite House. There he was laid upon one of the beds, and his wounds carefully washed. No vital organ seemed to have been injured, but the orang was very feeble from loss of blood, and a strong fever had set in. His wounds having been dressed, a strict diet was imposed upon him, “just as for a real person,” Neb said, and they gave him a refreshing draught made from herbs.</p>
			<p>He slept at first but brokenly, but little by little, his breathing became more regular, and they left him in a heavy sleep. From time to time Top came “on tip-toe” to visit his friend, and seemed to approve of the attentions which had been bestowed upon it.</p>
			<p>One of Jup’s hands hung over the side of the bed, and Top licked it sympathetically.</p>
			<p>The same morning they disposed of the dead foxes by dragging the bodies to the Far West and burying them there.</p>
			<p>This attack, which might have been attended with very grave results, was a lesson to the colonists, and thenceforth they never slept before having ascertained that all the bridges were raised and that no invasion was possible.</p>
			<p>Meantime Jup, after having given serious alarm for some days, began to grow better. The fever abated gradually, and Spilett, who was something of a physician, considered him out of danger. On the 16th of August Jup began to eat. Neb made him some nice, sweet dishes, which the invalid swallowed greedily, for if he had a fault, it was that he was a bit of a glutton, and Neb had never done anything to correct this habit.</p>
			<p>“What would you have?” he said to Spilett, who sometimes rebuked the negro for indulging him. “Poor Jup has no other pleasure than to eat! and I am only too glad to be able to reward his services in this way!”</p>
			<p>By the 21st of August he was about again. His wounds were healed, and the colonists saw that he would soon recover his accustomed suppleness and vigor. Like other convalescents he was seized with an excessive hunger, and the reporter let him eat what he wished, knowing that the monkey’s instinct would preserve him from excess. Neb was overjoyed to see his pupil’s appetite returned.</p>
			<p>“Eat Jup,” he said, “and you shall want for nothing. You have shed your blood for us, and it is right that I should help you to make it again!”</p>
			<p>At length, on the 25th of August, the colonists seated in the great hall, were called by Neb to Jup’s room.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” asked the reporter.</p>
			<p>“Look!” answered Neb, laughing, and what did they see but Jup, seated like a Turk within the doorway of Granite House, tranquilly and gravely smoking!</p>
			<p>“My pipe!” cried Pencroff. “He has taken my pipe! Well, Jup, I give it to you. Smoke on my friend, smoke on!”</p>
			<p>And Jup gravely puffed on, seeming to experience the utmost enjoyment.</p>
			<p>Smith was not greatly astonished at this incident, and he cited numerous examples of tamed monkeys that had become accustomed to the use of tobacco.</p>
			<p>And after this day master Jup had his own pipe hung in his room beside his tobacco-bag, and, lighting it himself with a live coal, he appeared to be the happiest of quadrumana. It seemed as if this community of taste drew closer together the bonds of friendship already existing between the worthy monkey and the honest sailor.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps he is a man,” Pencroff would sometimes say to Neb. “Would it astonish you if some day he was to speak?”</p>
			<p>“Indeed it would not,” replied Neb. “The wonder is that he don’t do it, as that is all he lacks!”</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless, it would be funny if some fine day he said to me:—Pencroff, suppose we change pipes!”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” responded Neb. “What a pity he was born mute!”</p>
			<p>Winter ended with September, and the work was renewed with ardor. The construction of the boat advanced rapidly. The planking was completed, and as wood was plenty Pencroff proposed that they line the interior with a stout ceiling, which would insure the solidity of the craft. Smith, not knowing what might be in store for them, approved the sailor’s idea of making his boat as strong as possible. The ceiling and the deck were finished towards the 13th of September. For caulking, they used some dry wrack, and the seams were then covered with boiling pitch, made from the pine trees of the forest.</p>
			<p>The arrangement of the boat was simple. She had been ballasted with heavy pieces of granite, set in a bed of lime, and weighing 12,000 pounds. A deck was placed over this ballast, and the interior was divided into two compartments, the larger containing two bunks, which served as chests. The foot of the mast was at the partition separating the compartments, which were entered through hatchways.</p>
			<p>Pencroff had no difficulty in finding a tree suitable for a mast. He chose a young straight fir, without knots, so that all he had to do was to square the foot and round it off at the head. All the iron work had been roughly but solidly made at the Chimneys; and in the first week of October yards, topmast, spars, oars, etc., everything, in short, was completed; and it was determined that they would first try the craft along the shores of the island, so as to see how she acted.</p>
			<p>She was launched on the 10th of October. Pencroff was radiant with delight. Completely rigged, she had been pushed on rollers to the edge of the shore, and, as the tide rose, she was floated on the surface of the water, amid the applause of the colonists, and especially of Pencroff, who showed no modesty on this occasion. Moreover, his vanity looked beyond the completion of the craft, as, now that she was built, he was to be her commander. The title of captain was bestowed upon him unanimously.</p>
			<p>In order to satisfy Captain Pencroff it was necessary at once to name his ship, and after considerable discussion they decided upon Good Luck—the name chosen by the honest sailor. Moreover, as the weather was fine, the breeze fresh, and the sea calm, the trial must be made at once in an excursion along the coast.</p>
			<p>“Get aboard! Get aboard!” cried Captain Pencroff.</p>
			<p>At half-past 10, after having eaten breakfast and put some provisions aboard, everybody, including Top and Jup, embarked, the sails were hoisted, the flag set at the masthead, and the Good Luck, with Pencroff at the helm, stood out to sea.</p>
			<p>On going out from Union Bay they had a fair wind, and they were able to see that, sailing before it, their speed was excellent. After doubling Jetsam Point and Claw Cape, Pencroff had to lie close to the wind in order to skirt along the shore, and he observed the Good Luck would sail to within five points of the wind, and that she made but little lee-way. She sailed very well, also, before the wind, minding her helm perfectly, and gained even in going about.</p>
			<p>The passengers were enchanted. They had a good boat, which, in case of need, could render them great service, and in this splendid weather, with the fair wind, the sail was delightful. Pencroff stood out to sea two or three miles, opposite Balloon Harbor, and then the whole varied panorama of the island from Claw Cape to Reptile Promontory was visible under a new aspect. In the foreground were the pine forests, contrasting with the foliage of the other trees, and over all rose Mt. Franklin, its head white with snow.</p>
			<p>“How beautiful it is!” exclaimed Herbert.</p>
			<p>“Yes, she is a pretty creature,” responded Pencroff. “I love her as a mother. She received us poor and needy, and what has she denied to these five children who tumbled upon her out of the sky?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing, captain, nothing,” answered Neb. And the two honest fellows gave three hearty cheers in honor of their island.</p>
			<p>Meantime, Spilett, seated by the mast, sketched the panorama before him, while Smith looked on in silence.</p>
			<p>“What do you say of our boat, now, sir?” demanded Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“It acts very well,” replied the engineer.</p>
			<p>“Good. And now don’t you think it could undertake a voyage of some length?”</p>
			<p>“Where, Pencroff?”</p>
			<p>“To Tabor Island, for instance.”</p>
			<p>“My friend,” replied the engineer, “I believe that in a case of necessity there need be no hesitancy in trusting to the Good Luck even for a longer journey; but, you know, I would be sorry to see you leave for Tabor Island, because nothing obliges you to go.”</p>
			<p>“One likes to know one’s neighbors,” answered Pencroff, whose mind was made up. “Tabor Island is our neighbor, and is all alone. Politeness requires that at least we make her a visit.”</p>
			<p>“The mischief!” exclaimed Spilett, “our friend Pencroff is a stickler for propriety.”</p>
			<p>“I am not a stickler at all,” retorted the sailor, who was a little vexed by the engineer’s opposition.</p>
			<p>“Remember, Pencroff,” said Smith, “that you could not go the island alone.”</p>
			<p>“One other would be all I would want.”</p>
			<p>“Supposing so,” replied the engineer, “would you risk depriving our colony of five, of two of its colonists?”</p>
			<p>“There are six,” rejoined Pencroff. “You forget Jup.”</p>
			<p>“There are seven,” added Neb. “Top is as good as another.”</p>
			<p>“There is no risk in it, Mr. Smith,” said Pencroff again.</p>
			<p>“Possibly not, Pencroff; but, I repeat, that it is exposing oneself without necessity.”</p>
			<p>The obstinate sailor did not answer, but let the conversation drop for the present. He little thought that an incident was about to aid him, and change to a work of humanity what had been merely a caprice open to discussion.</p>
			<p>The Good Luck, after having stood out to sea, was returning towards the coast and making for Balloon Harbor, as it was important to locate the channel-way between the shoals and reefs so as to buoy them, for this little inlet was to be resting place of the sloop.</p>
			<p>They were half a mile off shore, beating up to windward and moving somewhat slowly, as the boat was under the lee of the land. The sea was as smooth as glass. Herbert was standing in the bows indicating the channel-way. Suddenly he cried:—</p>
			<p>“Luff, Pencroff, luff.”</p>
			<p>“What is it?” cried the sailor, springing to his feet. “A rock?”</p>
			<p>“No—hold on, I cannot see very well—luff again—steady—bear away a little—” and while thus speaking, the lad lay down along the deck, plunged his arm quickly into the water, and then rising up again with something in his hand, exclaimed:—</p>
			<p>“It is a bottle!”</p>
			<p>Smith took it, and without saying a word, withdrew the cork and took out a wet paper, on which was written these words:—</p>
			<p>“A shipwrecked man—Tabor Island:—l53° W. lon.—37° 11’ S. lat.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
