<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">The inventory⁠—The night⁠—Some letters⁠—The search continued⁠—Plants and animals⁠—Herbert in danger⁠—Aboard⁠—The departure⁠—Bad weather⁠—A glimmer of intelligence⁠—Lost at sea⁠—A timely light.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Pencroff, Spilett and Herbert stood silent in darkness. Then the former gave a loud call. There was no answer. He lit a twig, and the light illuminated for a moment a small room, seemingly deserted. At one end was a large chimney, containing some cold cinders and an armful of dry wood. Pencroff threw the lighted twig into it, and the wood caught fire and gave out a bright light.</p>
				<p>The sailor and his companions thereupon discovered a bed in disorder, its damp and mildewed covers proving that it had been long unused; in the corner of the fireplace were two rusty kettles and an overturned pot; a clothespress with some sailors’ clothing, partially moulded; on the table a tin plate, and a Bible, injured by the dampness; in a corner some tools, a shovel, a mattock, a pick, two shot guns, one of which was broken; on a shelf was a barrel full of powder, a barrel of lead, and a number of boxes of caps. All were covered with a thick coating of dust.</p>
				<p>“There is no one here,” said the reporter.</p>
				<p>“Not a soul.”</p>
				<p>“This room has not been occupied in a long time.”</p>
				<p>“Since a very long time.”</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spilett,” said Pencroff, “I think that instead of going on board we had better stay here all night.”</p>
				<p>“You are right, Pencroff, and if the proprietor returns he will not be sorry, perhaps, to find the place occupied.”</p>
				<p>“He won’t come back, though,” said the sailor, shaking his head.</p>
				<p>“Do you think he has left the island?”</p>
				<p>“If he had left the island he would have taken these things with him. You know how much a shipwrecked person would be attached to these objects. No, no,” repeated the sailor, in the tone of a man perfectly convinced; “no, he has not left the island. He is surely here.”</p>
				<p>“Alive?”</p>
				<p>“Alive or dead. But if he is dead he could not have buried himself, I am sure, and we will at least find his remains.”</p>
				<p>It was therefore agreed to pass the night in this house, and a supply of wood in the corner gave them the means of heating it. The door having been closed, the three explorers, seated upon a bench, spoke little, but remained deep in thought. They were in the mood to accept anything that might happen, and they listened eagerly for any sound from without. If the door had suddenly opened and a man had stood before them, they would not have been much surprised, in spite of all the evidence of desolation throughout the house; and their hands were ready to clasp the hands of this man, of this shipwrecked one, of this unknown friend whose friends awaited him.</p>
				<p>But no sound was heard, the door did not open, and the hours passed by.</p>
				<p>The night seemed interminable to the sailor and his companions. Herbert, alone, slept for two hours, as at his age, sleep is a necessity. All were anxious to renew the search of the day before, and to explore the innermost recesses of the islet. Pencroff’s conclusions were certainly just, since the house and its contents had been abandoned. They determined, therefore, to search for the remains of its inhabitant, and to give them Christian burial.</p>
				<p>As soon as it was daylight they began to examine the house. It was prettily situated under a small hill, on which grew several fine gum trees. Before it a large space had been cleared, giving a view over the sea. A small lawn, surrounded by a dilapidated fence, extended to the bank of the little stream. The house had evidently been built from planks taken from a ship. It seemed likely that a ship had been thrown upon the island, that all or at least one of the crew had been saved, and that this house had been built from the wreck. This was the more probable, as Spilett, in going round the dwelling, saw on one of the planks these half-effaced letters:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="inscription">
					<p>
						<b>BR … TAN … A.</b>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Britannia</i>,” exclaimed Pencroff, who had been called by the reporter to look at it; “that is a common name among ships, and I cannot say whether it is English or American. However, it don’t matter to what country the man belongs, we will save him, if he is alive. But before we begin our search let us go back to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Good Luck</i>.”</p>
				<p>Pencroff had been seized with a sort of anxiety about his sloop. Supposing the island was inhabited, and someone had taken it⁠—but he shrugged his shoulders at this unlikely thought. Nevertheless the sailor was not unwilling to go on board to breakfast. The route already marked was not more than a mile in length, and they started on their walk, looking carefully about them in the woods and underbrush, through which ran hundreds of pigs and goats.</p>
				<p>In twenty minutes the party reached the place where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Good Luck</i> rode quietly at anchor. Pencroff gave a sigh of satisfaction.</p>
				<p>After all, this boat was his baby, and it is a father’s right to be often anxious without reason.</p>
				<p>All went on board and ate a hearty breakfast, so as not to want anything before a late dinner; then the exploration was renewed, and conducted with the utmost carefulness. As it was likely that the solitary inhabitant of this island was dead, the party sought rather to find his remains than any traces of him living. But during all the morning they were unable to find anything; if he was dead, some animal must have devoured his body.</p>
				<p>“We will leave tomorrow at daylight,” said Pencroff to his companions, who towards two o’clock were resting for a few moments under a group of trees.</p>
				<p>“I think we need not hesitate to take those things which belonged to him?” queried Herbert.</p>
				<p>“I think not,” answered Spilett; “and these arms and tools will add materially to the stock at Granite House. If I am not mistaken, what is left of the lead and powder is worth a good deal.”</p>
				<p>“And we must not forget to capture a couple of these pigs,” said Pencroff.</p>
				<p>“Nor to gather some seed,” added Herbert, “which will give us some of our own vegetables.”</p>
				<p>“Perhaps it would be better to spend another day here, in order to get together everything that we want,” suggested the reporter.</p>
				<p>“No, sir;” replied the sailor. “I want to get away tomorrow morning. The wind seems to be shifting to the west, and will be in our favor going back.”</p>
				<p>“Then don’t let us lose any time,” said Herbert, rising.</p>
				<p>“We will not,” replied Pencroff. “Herbert, you get the seed, and Spilett and I will chase the pigs, and although we haven’t Top, I think we will catch some.”</p>
				<p>Herbert, therefore, followed the path which led to the cultivated part of the island, while the others plunged at once into the forest. Although the pigs were plenty they were singularly agile, and not in the humor to be captured. However, after half an hour’s chasing the hunters had captured a couple in their lair, when cries mingled with horrible hoarse sounds, having nothing human in them, were heard. Pencroff and Spilett sprang to their feet, regardless of the pigs, which escaped.</p>
				<p>“It is Herbert!” cried the reporter.</p>
				<p>“Hurry!” cried the sailor, as the two ran with their utmost speed towards the place from whence the cries came.</p>
				<p>They had need to hasten, for at a turn in the path they saw the lad prostrate beneath a savage, or perhaps a gigantic ape, who was throttling him.</p>
				<p>To throw themselves on this monster and pinion him to the ground, dragging Herbert away, was the work of a moment. The sailor had herculean strength. Spilett, too, was muscular, and, in spite of the resistance of the monster, it was bound so that it could not move.</p>
				<p>“You are not wounded, Herbert?”</p>
				<p>“No, oh no.”</p>
				<p>“Ah! if it had hurt you, this ape⁠—”</p>
				<p>“But he is not an ape!” cried Herbert.</p>
				<p>At these words Pencroff and Spilett looked again at the object lying on the ground. In fact, it was not an ape, but a human being⁠—a man! But what a man! He was a savage, in all the horrible acceptation of the word; and, what was more frightful, he seemed to have fallen to the last degree of brutishness.</p>
				<p>Matted hair, tangled beard descending to his waist, his body naked, save for a rag about his loins, wild eyes, long nails, mahogany-colored skin, feet as hard as if they had been made of horn; such was the miserable creature which it was, nevertheless, necessary to call a man. But one might well question whether this body still contained a soul, or whether the low, brutish instinct alone survived.</p>
				<p>“Are you perfectly sure that this is what has been a man?” questioned Pencroff of the reporter.</p>
				<p>“Alas! there can be no doubt of it,” replied Spilett.</p>
				<p>“Can he be the person shipwrecked?” asked Herbert.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” responded the reporter, “but the poor creature is no longer human.”</p>
				<p>Spilett was right. Evidently, if the castaway had ever been civilized, isolation had made him a savage, a real creature of the woods. He gave utterance to hoarse sounds, from between teeth which were as sharp as those of animals living on raw flesh. Memory had doubtless long ago left him, and he had long since forgotten the use of arms and tools, and even how to make a fire. One could see that he was active and supple, but that his physical qualities had developed to the exclusion of his moral perception.</p>
				<p>Spilett spoke to him, but he neither understood nor listened, and, looking him in the eye, the reporter could see that all intelligence had forsaken him. Nevertheless, the prisoner did not struggle or strive to break his bonds. Was he cowed by the presence of these men, whom he had once resembled? Was there in some corner of his brain a flitting remembrance which drew him towards humanity? Free, would he have fled or would he have remained? They did not know, and they did not put him to the proof. After having looked attentively at the miserable creature, Spilett said:⁠—</p>
				<p>“What he is, what he has been, and what he will be; it is still our duty to take him to Lincoln Island.”</p>
				<p>“Oh yes, yes,” exclaimed Herbert, “and perhaps we can, with care, restore to him some degree of intelligence.”</p>
				<p>“The soul never dies,” answered the reporter, “and it would be a great thing to bring back this creature of God’s making from his brutishness.”</p>
				<p>Pencroff shook his head doubtfully.</p>
				<p>“It is necessary to try at all events,” said the reporter, “humanity requires it of us.”</p>
				<p>It was, indeed, their duty as civilized and Christian beings, and they well knew that Smith would approve of their course.</p>
				<p>“Shall we leave him bound?” inquired the sailor.</p>
				<p>“Perhaps if we unfasten his feet he will walk,” said Herbert.</p>
				<p>“Well, let us try,” replied the sailor.</p>
				<p>And the cords binding the creature’s legs were loosened, although his arms were kept firmly bound. He rose without manifesting any desire to escape. His tearless eyes darted sharp glances upon the three men who marched beside him, and nothing denoted that he remembered being or having been like them. A wheezing sound escaped from his lips, and his aspect was wild, but he made no resistance.</p>
				<p>By the advice of the reporter, the poor wretch was taken to the house, where, perhaps, the sight of the objects in it might make some impression upon him. Perhaps a single gleam would awaken his sleeping consciousness, illuminate his darkened mind.</p>
				<p>The house was near by, and in a few minutes they were there; but the prisoner recognized nothing⁠—he seemed to have lost consciousness of everything. Could it be that this brutish state was due to his long imprisonment on the island? That, having come here a reasoning being, his isolation had reduced him to this state?</p>
				<p>The reporter thought that perhaps the sight of fire might affect him, and in a moment one of those lovely flames which attract even animals lit up the fireplace. The sight of this flame seemed at first to attract the attention of the unfortunate man, but very soon he ceased regarding it. Evidently, for the present at least, there was nothing to do but take him aboard the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Good Luck</i>, which was accordingly done. He was left in charge of Pencroff, while the two others returned to the island and brought over the arms and implements, a lot of seeds, some game, and two pairs of pigs which they had caught. Everything was put on board, and the sloop rode ready to hoist anchor as soon as the next morning’s tide would permit.</p>
				<p>The prisoner had been placed in the forward hold, where he lay calm, quiet, insensible, and mute. Pencroff offering him some cooked meat to eat, he pushed it away; but, on being shown one of the ducks which Herbert had killed, he pounced on it with bestial avidity and devoured it.</p>
				<p>“You think he’ll be himself again?” asked the sailor, shaking his head.</p>
				<p>“Perhaps,” replied the reporter. “It is not impossible that our attentions will react on him, since it is the isolation that has done this; and he will be alone no longer.”</p>
				<p>“The poor fellow has doubtless been this way for a long time.”</p>
				<p>“Perhaps so.”</p>
				<p>“How old do you think he is?” asked the lad.</p>
				<p>“That is hard to say,” replied the reporter, “as his matted beard obscures his face; but he is no longer young, and I should say he was at least fifty years old.”</p>
				<p>“Have you noticed how his eyes are set deep in his head?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, but I think that they are more human than one would suspect from his general appearance.”</p>
				<p>“Well, we will see,” said Pencroff; “and I am curious to have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith’s opinion of our savage. We went to find a human being, and we are bringing back a monster. Anyhow, one takes what he can get.”</p>
				<p>The night passed, and whether the prisoner slept or not he did not move, although he had been unbound. He was like one of those beasts that in the first moments of their capture submit, and to whom the rage returns later.</p>
				<p>At daybreak the next day, the 17th, the change in the weather was as Pencroff had predicted. The wind hauled round to the northwest and favored the return of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Good Luck</i>; but at the same time it had freshened, so as to make the sailing more difficult. At five o’clock the anchor was raised, Pencroff took a reef in the mainsail and headed directly towards home.</p>
				<p>The first day passed without incident. The prisoner rested quietly in the forward cabin, and, as he had once been a sailor, the motion of the sloop produced upon him a sort of salutary reaction. Did it recall to him some remembrance of his former occupation? At least he rested tranquil, more astonished than frightened.</p>
				<p>On the 16th the wind freshened considerably, coming round more to the north, and therefore in a direction less favorable to the course of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Good Luck</i>, which bounded over the waves. Pencroff was soon obliged to hold her nearer to the wind, and without saying so, he began to be anxious at the lookout ahead. Certainly, unless the wind moderated, it would take much longer to go back than it had taken to come.</p>
				<p>On the 17th they had been forty-eight hours out, and yet nothing indicated they were in the neighborhood of Lincoln Island. It was, moreover, impossible to reckon their course, or even to estimate the distance traversed, as the direction and the speed had been too irregular. Twenty-four hours later there was still no land in view. The wind was dead ahead, and an ugly sea running. On the 18th a huge wave struck the sloop, and had not the crew been lashed to the deck, they would have been swept overboard.</p>
				<p>On this occasion Pencroff and his companions, busy in clearing things away, received an unhoped-for assistance from the prisoner, who sprang from the hatchway as if his sailor instinct had returned to him, and breaking the rail by a vigorous blow⁠—with a spar, enabled the water on the deck to flow off more freely. Then, the boat cleared, without having said a word, he returned to his cabin.</p>
				<p>Nevertheless, the situation was bad, and the sailor had cause to believe himself lost upon this vast sea, without the possibility of regaining his course. The night of the 18th was dark and cold. But about eleven o’clock the wind lulled, the sea fell, and the sloop, less tossed about, moved more rapidly. None of the crew thought of sleep. They kept an eager lookout, as either Lincoln Island must be near at hand and they would discover it at daybreak, or the sloop had been drifted from her course by the currents, and it would be next to impossible to rectify the direction.</p>
				<p>Pencroff, anxious to the last degree, did not, however, despair; but, seated at the helm, he tried to see through the thick darkness around him. Towards two o’clock he suddenly started up, crying:⁠—</p>
				<p>“A light! a light!”</p>
				<p>It was indeed a bright light appearing twenty miles to the northeast. Lincoln Island was there, and this light, evidently lit by Smith, indicated the direction to be followed.</p>
				<p>Pencroff, who had been heading much too far towards the north, changed his course, and steered directly towards the light, which gleamed above the horizon like a star of the first magnitude.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
