<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 48</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-48" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLVIII</span></h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The projected expedition⁠—Ayrton at the corral⁠—Visit to port balloon⁠—Pencroff’s remarks⁠—Despatch sent to the corral⁠—No answer from Ayrton⁠—Setting out next day⁠—Why the wire did not act⁠—A detonation.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Meanwhile the thing uppermost in the colonists’ thought was to achieve the complete exploration of the island which had been decided upon, an exploration which now would have two objects:⁠—First, to discover the mysterious being whose existence was no longer a matter of doubt; and, at the same time to find out what had become of the pirates, what hiding place they had chosen, what sort of life they were leading, and what was to be feared from them.</p>
			<p>Smith would have set off at once, but as the expedition would take several days, it seemed better to load the wagon with all the necessaries for camping out. Now at this time one of the onagers, wounded in the leg, could not bear harness; it must have several days’ rest, and they thought it would make little difference if they delayed the departure a week, that is, till November 20. November in this latitude corresponds to the May of the Northern Hemisphere, and the weather was fine. They were now at the longest days in the year, so that everything was favorable to the projected expedition, which, if it did not attain its principal object, might be fruitful in discoveries, especially of the products of the soil; for Smith intended to explore those thick forests of the Far West, which stretched to the end of Serpentine Peninsula.</p>
			<p>During the nine days which would precede their setting out, it was agreed that they should finish work on Prospect Plateau. But Ayrton had to go back to the corral to take care of their domesticated animals. It was settled that he should stay there two days, and leave the beasts with plenty of fodder. Just as he was setting out, Smith asked him if he would like to have one of them with him, as the island was no longer secure. Ayrton replied that it would be useless, as he could do everything by himself, and that there was no danger to fear. If anything happened at or near the corral, he would instantly acquaint the colonists of it by a telegram sent to Granite House.</p>
			<p>So Ayrton drove off in the twilight, about 9 o’clock, behind one onager, and two hours afterwards the electric wire gave notice that he had found everything in order at the corral.</p>
			<p>During these two days Smith was busy at a project which would finally secure Granite House from a surprise. The point was to hide completely the upper orifice of the former weir, which had been already blocked up with stones, and half hidden under grass and plants, at the southern angle of Lake Grant. Nothing could be easier, since by raising the level of the lake two or three feet, the hole would be entirely under water.</p>
			<p>Now to raise the level, they had only to make a dam across the two trenches by which Glycerine Creek and Waterfall Creek were fed. The colonists were incited to the task, and the two dams, which were only seven or eight feet long, by three feet high, were rapidly erected of closely cemented stones. When the work had been done, no one could have suspected the existence of the subterranean conduit. The little stream which served to feed the reservoir at Granite House, and to work the elevator, had been suffered to flow in its channel, so that water might never be wanting. The elevator once raised, they might defy attack.</p>
			<p>This work had been quickly finished, and Pencroff, Spilett, and Herbert found time for an expedition to Port Balloon. The sailor was anxious to know whether the little inlet up which the Good Luck was moored had been visited by the convicts.</p>
			<p>“These gentry got to land on the southern shore,” he observed, “and if they followed the line of the coast they may have discovered the little harbor, in which case I wouldn’t give half a dollar for our Good Luck.”</p>
			<p>So off the three went in the afternoon of November 10. They were well armed, and as Pencroff slipped two bullets into each barrel of his gun, he had a look which presaged no good to whoever came too near, “beast or man,” as he said. Neb went with them to the elbow of the Mercy, and lifted the bridge after them. It was agreed that they should give notice of their return by firing a shot, when Neb would come back to put down the bridge.</p>
			<p>The little band walked straight for the south coast. The distance was only three miles and a half, but they took two hours to walk it. They searched on both sides of the way, both the forest and Tadorn’s Fens; but they found no trace of the fugitives. Arriving at Port Balloon, they saw with great satisfaction that the Good Luck was quietly moored in the narrow inlet, which was so well hidden by the rocks that it could be seen neither from sea nor shore, but only from directly above or below.</p>
			<p>“After all,” said Pencroff, “the rascals haven’t been here. The vipers like tall grass better, and we shall find them in the Far-West.”</p>
			<p>“And it’s a fortunate thing,” added Herbert, “for if they had found the Good Luck, they would have made use of her in getting away, and we could never have gone back to Tabor Island.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” replied the reporter, “it will be important to put a paper there stating the situation of Lincoln Island, Ayrton’s new residence, in case the Scotch yacht should come after him.”</p>
			<p>“Well, here is our Good Luck, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spilett,” said the sailor, “ready to start with her crew at the first signal!”</p>
			<p>Talking thus, they got on board and walked about the deck. On a sudden the sailor, after examining the bit around which the cable of the anchor was wound, cried,</p>
			<p>“Hallo! this is a bad business!”</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter, Pencroff?” asked the reporter.</p>
			<p>“The matter is that that knot was never tied by me⸺”</p>
			<p>And Pencroff pointed to a rope which made the cable fast to the bit, so as to prevent its tripping.</p>
			<p>“How, never tied by you?” asked Spilett.</p>
			<p>“No, I can swear to it. I never tie a knot like that.”</p>
			<p>“You are mistaken, Pencroff.”</p>
			<p>“No, I’m not mistaken,” insisted the sailor. “That knot of mine is second nature with me.”</p>
			<p>“Then have the convicts been on board?” asked Herbert.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said Pencroff, “but somebody has certainly raised and dropped this anchor!”</p>
			<p>The sailor was so positive that neither Spilett nor Herbert could contest his assertion. It was evident that the beat had shifted place more or less since Pencroff had brought it back to Balloon Harbor. As for the sailor, he had no doubt that the anchor had been pulled up and cast again. Now, why had these manœuvres taken place unless the boat had been used on some expedition?</p>
			<p>“Then why did we not see the Good Luck pass the offing?” said the reporter, who wanted to raise every possible objection.</p>
			<p>“But, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spilett,” answered the sailor, “they could have set out in the night with a good wind, and in two hours have been out of sight of the island.”</p>
			<p>“Agreed,” said Spilett, but I still ask with what object the convicts used the Good Luck, and why, after using her, they brought her back to port?”</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spilett,” said the sailor, “we will have to include that among our mysterious incidents, and think no more of it. One thing is certain, the Good Luck was there, and is here! If the convicts take it a second time, it may never find its way back again.”</p>
			<p>“Then, Pencroff,” said Herbert, “perhaps we had better take the Good Luck back and anchor her in front of Granite House.”</p>
			<p>“I can hardly say,” answered the sailor, “but I think not. The mouth of the Mercy is a bad place for a ship; the sea is very heavy there.”</p>
			<p>“But by hauling it over the sand to the foot of the Chimneys⸺”</p>
			<p>“Well, perhaps,” answered Pencroff. “In any case, as we have to leave Granite House for a long expedition, I believe the Good Luck will be safer here during oar absence, and he will do well to leave her here until the island is rid of these rascals.”</p>
			<p>“That is my opinion, too,” said the reporter. At least in case of bad weather, she will not be exposed as she would be at the mouth of the Mercy.”</p>
			<p>“But if the convicts should pay her another visit?” said Herbert.</p>
			<p>“Well, my boy,” said Pencroff, “if they do not find the boat here they will search until they do find her; and in our absence there is nothing to prevent their carrying her off from the front of Granite House. I agree with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spilett that we had better leave her at Balloon Harbor; but if we have not rid the island of these wretches by the time we come back it will be more prudent to take our ship back to Granite House, until we have nothing more to fear from our enemies.”</p>
			<p>“All right,” said Spilett. “Let us go back now.”</p>
			<p>When they returned to Granite House, they told Smith what had happened, and the latter approved their present and future plans. He even promised Pencroff he would examine that part of the channel situated between the island and the coast, so as to see if it would be possible to make an artificial harbor by means of a dam. In this way the Good Luck would be always within reach, in sight of the colonists, and locked up if necessary.</p>
			<p>On the same evening they sent a telegram to Ayrton, asking him to bring back from the corral a couple of goats, which Neb wished to acclimatize on the plateau. Strange to say, Ayrton did not acknowledge the receipt of this despatch, as was his custom to do. This surprised the engineer, but he concluded that Ayrton was not at the corral at the moment, and perhaps had started on his way back to Granite House. In fact, two days had elapsed since his departure; and it had been agreed that on the evening of the 10th or the morning of the 11th, at latest, he would return.</p>
			<p>The colonists were now waiting to see Ayrton on Prospect Plateau. Neb and Herbert both looked after the approach by way of the bridge, so as to let it down when their companion should appear, but when 6 o’clock in the evening came, and there was no sign of Ayrton, they agreed to send another despatch, asking for an immediate answer.</p>
			<p>The wire at Granite House remained silent.</p>
			<p>The uneasiness of the colonists was now extreme. What had happened? “Was Ayrton not at the corral? or, if there, had he not power over his own movements? Ought they to go in search of him on this dark night?</p>
			<p>They discussed the point. Some were for going, and others for waiting.</p>
			<p>“But,” said Herbert, “perhaps some accident has happened to the wires which prevents their working.”</p>
			<p>“That may be,” said the reporter.</p>
			<p>“Let us wait until to-morrow,” said Smith. “It is just possible that either Ayrton has not received our despatch, or we have missed his.”</p>
			<p>They waited, as may be imagined, with much anxiety. At daylight on the 11th of November, Smith sent a message across the wires, but received no answer. Again, with the same result.</p>
			<p>“Let us set off at once for the corral,” said he.</p>
			<p>“Aid will armed,” added Pencroff.</p>
			<p>It was agreed that Granite House must not be deserted, so Neb was left behind to take charge. After accompanying his companions to Glycerine Creek, he put up the bridge again, and hid behind a tree, to wait either for their return or for that of Ayrton. In case the pirates should appear, and should attempt to force the passage, he would try to defend it with his gun; and in the last resort he would take refuge in Granite House, where, the elevator once drawn up, he would be in perfect safety. The others were to go direct to the corral, and failing to find Ayrton there, were to scour the neighboring woods.</p>
			<p>At 6 o’clock in the morning the engineer and his three companions had crossed Glycerine Creek, and Neb posted himself behind a low cliff, crowned by some large dragon trees on the left side of the brook. The colonists, after leaving Prospect Plateau, took the direct route to the corral. They carried their guns on their shoulders, ready to fire at the first sign of hostility. The two rifles and the two guns had been carefully loaded.</p>
			<p>On either side of the path was a dense thicket, which might easily hide enemies, who, as they were armed, would be indeed formidable. The colonists walked on rapidly without a word. Top preceded them, sometimes keeping to the path, and sometimes making a detour into the wood, but not appearing to suspect anything unusual; and they might depend upon it that the faithful dog would not be taken by surprise, and would bark at the slightest appearance of danger.</p>
			<p>Along this same path Smith and his companions followed the telegraphic wires which connected the corral with Granite House. For the first two miles they did not notice any solution of continuity. The posts were in good condition, the insulators uninjured, and the wire evenly stretched. From this point the engineer noticed that the tension was less complete, and at last, arriving at post <abbr>No.</abbr> 74, Herbert, who was ahead of the others, cried, “The wire is broken!”</p>
			<p>His companions hastened forward and arrived at the spot where the boy had stopped. There the overturned post was lying across the path. They had discovered the break, and it was evident that the dispatches from Granite House could not have been received at the corral.</p>
			<p>“It can’t be the wind that has overturned this post,” said Pencroff.</p>
			<p>“No,” answered the reporter, “there are marks of footsteps on the ground; it has been uprooted by the hand of man.”</p>
			<p>“Besides, the wire is broken,” added Herbert, showing the two ends of the wire which had been violently torn asunder.</p>
			<p>“Is the break a fresh one?” asked Smith.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Herbert, “it was certainly made a very short time ago.”</p>
			<p>“To the corral! to the corral!” cried the sailor.</p>
			<p>The colonists were then midway between Granite House and the corral, and had still two miles and a half to go. They started on a run.</p>
			<p>In fact, they might well fear that something had happened at the corral. Ayrton doubtless might have sent a telegram which had not arrived. It was not this which alarmed his companions, but a circumstance more remarkable. Ayrton, who had promised to come back the evening before, had not reappeared! The communication, between Granite House and the corral had been out with a sinister design.</p>
			<p>They hurried on, their hearts beating quick with fear for their comrade, to whom they were sincerely attached; Were they to find him struck down by the hand of those he had formerly led?</p>
			<p>Soon they reached the place where the road lay along by the little brook flowing from Red Creek, which watered the meadows of the corral. They had moderated their pace, so as not to be out of breath at the moment when a deadly struggle might occur. Their guns were uncocked, but loaded. Each of them watched one side of the woods. Top kept up an ill-omened growling.</p>
			<p>At last the fenced enclosure appeared behind the trees. They saw no signs of devastation. The door was closed as usual; a profound silence reigned at the corral. Neither the accustomed bleatings of the sheep nor the voice of Ayrton was to be heard.</p>
			<p>“Let us go in,” said Smith, and the engineer advanced, while his companions, keeping guard twenty feet in the rear, stood ready to fire.</p>
			<p>Smith raised the inner latch, and began to push back the door, when Top barked loudly. There was a report from behind the fence, followed by a cry of pain, and Herbert, pierced by a bullet, fell to the ground!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
