<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Glossary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="glossary" epub:type="glossary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Glossary</h2>
			<p>AGOUTI. A genus of rodent animals, the size of a rabbit, but more like the squirrel in appearance, with the exception of the tail, which is a short, bare stump. When at rest, they sit upon their haunches, holding their food between their forepaws.</p>
			<p>ALBATROSS. A genus of large, web-footed, acquatic birds, possessing prodigious powers of flight. Its wings, when extended, sometimes measure 15 feet.</p>
			<p>ALGAROBA BEANS. The seeds of the algaroba or carob tree. These seeds were formerly used by jewellers as weights, and the sweetish honey in the seedpod is supposed by some to be the wild honey upon which <abbr>St.</abbr> John lived in the wilderness. Animals, especially horses, are fond of the bean.</p>
			<p>AI. The three-toed sloth. The only animal which can neither walk nor stand. It is herbivorous, and lives in trees, moving suspended from a branch by its long and powerful arms.</p>
			<p>ANTHROPOMORPHI. Animals resembling human beings in form.</p>
			<p>APYREXY. The intermission of a fever.</p>
			<p>AR<abbr class="era">AD</abbr>S. An order of plants of which dragon-root, or jack-in-the-pulpit is a familiar example. Portland sago is made from the corms of some of these plants.</p>
			<p>ARGALL. A species of moufflon or wild sheep.</p>
			<p>AZOTH. The old name for nitrogen.</p>
			<p>BALEEN. The substance called whalebone.</p>
			<p>BALLISTIC. Relating to engines for throwing missiles; such as the ancient ballista.</p>
			<p>BANKSIA. A genus of plants remarkable for the beauty of their flowers and their evergreen foliage. They are sometimes called honeysuckle trees.</p>
			<p>BUSTARD. A kind of wild turkey inhabiting the open plains of Europe, Asia and Africa.</p>
			<p>CABIAI. The largest known rodent. <i>Hystricidæ</i>. from its aquatic habits it is sometimes called a water-hog.</p>
			<p>CARAPACE. A thick, solid shell covering some reptiles, as the turtle.</p>
			<p>CASAURINÆ. Tropical plants, so named on account of the resemblance their leaves bear to the drooping feathers of the cassowary. For this reason they are sometimes called cassowary trees.</p>
			<p>CASSOWARY. A large, long-legged bird of the ostrich family, famous for its speed in running.</p>
			<p>CATACLYSM. An inundation or deluge.</p>
			<p>CELLULOSE. Called also celluline. A substance which constitutes the cellular tissue of all plants.</p>
			<p>CEMENTATION. The process of changing the properties of bodies by heating them in contact with the powder of other substances.</p>
			<p>CETACEA. The name of the genus of marine animals which includes whales, dolphins, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>CINCHONIA. A vegetable alkali found in the cinchona⁠—a genus of trees found in Peru⁠—the bark of which is much used as a febrifugal, and is known as Peruvian Bark. Cinchonia is not much used in medicine.</p>
			<p>COCKATOO. A genus of birds of the parrot family, distinguished from all other parrots by a crest of feathers on the head, which the bird can raise or depress at pleasure.</p>
			<p>CONIFERS. <i>Coniferæ</i>. An order of cone-bearing plants, including fir-trees, pines, cedars, junipers, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>COORDINATES. A system of lines and angles by which the position of any point may be determined with reference to a fixed point.</p>
			<p>CORM. The solid, underground stem of a plant, like the bulb of a tulip; differing, however, from a bulb in being solid.</p>
			<p>COUROUCOUS. Birds of the warbler family, which, excepting the humming bird family, contains the smallest birds in the world. The Nightingale, Wood wren and Golden-crests are familiar examples.</p>
			<p>CURASSOW. A gallinaceous bird, about the size of turkeys, and capable of domestication.</p>
			<p>CYCAS. A genus of trees intermediate between the palms and the ferns, cultivated in China, and valued for its pith, which furnishes a kind of sago.</p>
			<p>DEODAR. The Himalayan cedar. A genus of trees belonging to the order <i>Pinaccæ</i>; the same order as the cedars of Lebanon, celebrated for its beauty, its longevity, its magnitude, and the durability of its timber.</p>
			<p>DUGONG. An herbivorous mammal having an elongated body, with flippers near the head, and terminated by a crescent-shaped tail. It drags itself along the shore and browses on the herbage that grows along the banks of the rivers which it frequents.</p>
			<p>ECHIDNA. A genus of ovoviparous mammals, which have the general form of the anteater, but the body is covered with spines like a porcupine; hence they are sometimes called porcupine anteaters.</p>
			<p>EMUE. A species of cassowary found principally in Australia, and sometimes called Australian cassowary.</p>
			<p>EUCALYPTUS. A genus of plants of the myrtle family, which grow to a prodigious height. Its leaves exude a substance resembling manna, which falls to the ground in pieces as large as nuts. The trees are sometimes called gum trees.</p>
			<p>FEBRIFUGE. A medicine to drive away or allay fever.</p>
			<p>FECULA. A term applied to the substance obtained from plants; also called starch or farina.</p>
			<p>FULGURITE. A vitrified sand-tube made by the action of lightning.</p>
			<p>FULIGINOUS. Resembling smoke; smokey.</p>
			<p>FUSIFORM. Spindle-shaped.</p>
			<p>GARGOYLE. A projecting waterspout, often grotesquely carved, attached to old gothic buildings.</p>
			<p>HYDROGRAPHY. As opposed to orography; the water system of a country.</p>
			<p>IZARD. The chamois of the Pyrenees.</p>
			<p>JACAMAR. A genus of climbing birds, closely allied to the kingfishers, that live in forests, feed on insects, and build in low bushes. Their plumage has a carious metallic lustre.</p>
			<p>JETSAM. Goods coming to land which have been thrown overboard from a ship in distress.</p>
			<p>KAOLINE. The Chinese name for a kind of porcelain clay.</p>
			<p>GLOSSARY.</p>
			<p>KOULAS. See Ai.</p>
			<p>LARDIZABALACEÆ. An order of twining shrubs, some of which furnish our greenhouses with pretty evergreen climbers.</p>
			<p>LENTICULAR. Having the form of a double convex lens.</p>
			<p>LIANA. A name used to designate the climbing, twining plants which abound in tropical forests, often growing to an immense size, and forming a perfect network of branches, impenetrable without the aid of a hatchet. They are comparatively rare in our climate, but honeysuckles may be mentioned as familiar examples.</p>
			<p>LILIACKÆ. Plants of the order of amaryllids, growing to an enormous size. They are commonly known as the giant Lily. The stem is leafy, 15 or 20 feet high, and bears at the top a cluster of superb large crimson blossoms.</p>
			<p>LITHODOMI. Molluscous animals which form holes in the solid rocks, in which they lodge themselves. One species (<i>Lithodomus Lithophagus</i>) is esteemed as an article of food, and is known by the name of the <i>sea-date shell</i>.</p>
			<p>LORIES. Birds belonging to the parrot family, remarkable for their soft beaks.</p>
			<p>MACAUCO. A genus of four-handed animals, resembling the monkey tribe.</p>
			<p>MACRODACTYLS. Long-toed wading birds.</p>
			<p>MAGOT. A small species of ape, sometimes called the Barbary ape.</p>
			<p>MALACOLOGIST. One who treats of mollusks.</p>
			<p>MANNIFERS. A name synonymous with mammals; meaning animals which suckle their young.</p>
			<p>MANATEE. A marine animal closely related to the dugong. It Is sometimes called lamantine or sea-cow.</p>
			<p>MARGARINE. A fatty solid matter obtained from oil.</p>
			<p>MOUFFLON. <i>Caprovis Mussimon</i>. Resembling the mountain sheep of Arizona. It is the size of a deer; covered with hair which assumes a woolly character in winter.</p>
			<p>OLEINE. The fluid portion of fats and oils.</p>
			<p>ONAGER. Another name for the wild ass.</p>
			<p>OROGRAPHY. As opposed to hydrography; the description of the mountain system of a country.</p>
			<p>PALMIPEDS. Web-footed fowl.</p>
			<p>PECCARY. An animal resembling a hog, sometimes called Mexican hog, or <i>tajacu</i>.</p>
			<p>PELLICAN. A largo aquatic bird, having a long, straight and very strong bill. It lives upon fish, which It carries for some time in a pouch or bag attached to the lover mandible.</p>
			<p>PIROGUE. A canoe, usually formed of a hollowed tree.</p>
			<p>POLYPORUS. A genus of fungi, allied to mushrooms, toadstools, sap-balls, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; used in Germany to make the tinder called Amadon.</p>
			<p>PTEROPODA. A class of mollusks which live In the open sea, and have a pair of flippers or wings, by which they pass rapidly through the water.</p>
			<p>PULP. The common name for marine animals of the genus octopus, such as the cuttlefish. They have eight feet or arms around the head, with which they swim, creep, and seize their prey. It is the <i>Pieuvre</i> of Victor Hugo.</p>
			<p>PUZZOLAN. Fine volcanic ashes, which harden under water, forming a kind of cement.</p>
			<p>PYROXYLINE. Called also guncotton. It burns In the open air with a flash, though without smoke or report; but It is violently explosive when fired in a confined space.</p>
			<p>QU<abbr class="era">AD</abbr>RUMANA. Animals having four hands, as apes, baboons, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>QUININE. The most important of the vegetable alkaloids found In the cinchona (see CINCHONIA). It is one of the most valuable antiperiodics and febrifuges known.</p>
			<p>RECRUDESENCE. The state of becoming sore again.</p>
			<p>RINFORDZANDO. A musical sign denoting an Increase of sound. Usually expressed by the abbreviation <i>rf</i>.</p>
			<p>RUMINANT. An animal that chews the cud.</p>
			<p>SAGOIN. A species of sapajo. The squirrel monkey; so called on account of its hairy tail.</p>
			<p>SALICIN. A white and very bitter substance, obtained from the bark of the willow and other trees.</p>
			<p>SAPAJOS. The proper name for tailed monkeys, as distinguishing them from apes, baboons and gorillas, which are tailless.</p>
			<p>SEXTANT. An Instrument for measuring angles by reflection.</p>
			<p>SPHENISCUS. Penguins; a subfamily of auks. Oceanic birds remarkable for their short legs, very short wings⁠—which are useful only In swimming; and their upright position when at rest.</p>
			<p>STEARINE. The most abundant of the solid constituents of fats and oils. Also a popular name for stearic acid, used in candles.</p>
			<p>SUCCEDANEOUS. Supplying the place of something else.</p>
			<p>TALUS. A sloping heap of fragments accumulated at the foot of a steep rock, from the face of which they have been broken off by the action of the weather.</p>
			<p>TETRA. <i>Tetraonieda</i>, or grouse. The bird here described resembles the pinated grouse, or prairie-chicken.</p>
			<p>TINAMONS. A family of birds belonging to the order <i>gallinæ</i>. They are about the size of quail.</p>
			<p>TOURACO-LORIES. Climbing birds of the parrot family.</p>
			<p>TRAGOPANS. A large species of pheasant.</p>
			<p>TUFA. A name given to volcanic dust, cemented by the Infiltration of water into a porous rock.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
